
TluQ IIErDIAT'RE LEASIE:
ALBURY-WVODOGA
INTR ODUCTORY STATE1MTE N 3Y iTE PRIME INIIISTER,
1R. E. G. ' IIIITLAI, ALBURY CIVIC CENTRE,
JAUPJARY 1973
This is an historic meeting. It is the first time on
which the Governments of the two oldest and most important
States have come together with the Commonwealth to plan the
development of a new cityo I trust it will signal the beginning,
not only of similar regional development projects, but of a
new spirit of common enterprise within our Federation. The
Murray River, once the symbol of colonial separation and
interstate rivalries, may yet come to stand for a new era
of interstate co-operation.
All three Governments represented here are committed
to decentralisation. Nevr South Wales and Victoria have worked
towards this goal over many years. But my Government believes
that only with the active participation of the Commonwealth,
in a scheme involving all three Governments as well as the
local authorities, can real decentralisation be achieved.
This enterprise is therefore a challenge to our energy,
our ability to work together, and our determination to ensure
the success of a pilot project which may one day convert our
former dreams and theories into living and concrete reality.
On the outcome of this task, the whole future of decentralisation
in this country may stand or fall.
My Government is committed to the concept of building
new cities. In my policy speech last November, I announced that
at first we would concentrate our initiatives and endeavours in
the Albury-Wodonga area. In making this choice, we were conscious
that as a national Government our involvement would benefit two
States, and ease the pressure on our two largest cities Sydney
and Melbourne. As I have mentioned, we regard th-is project as only
the first of several new cities with the development of which
we will be involved. Te are determined, therefore, to use our
full resources to ensure its success. We believe that the
chances of success are high. Its location on the transport
corridor between Melbourne and Sydney will be attractive to
industry. It has an adequate supply of water. It is
convenient to major recreational areas, and its natural
environment provides a beautiful setting.
Let me outline briefly what the Commonwealth hopes to
see happen at Albury-Wodonga. We look first of all, for a
significant acceleration of population growth. Much of this
increased population would, we hope, be made up of people
who would otherwise have gone to Sydney or Melbourne. We
want to see Albury-Wodonga achieve the status of a major
city. We set no limit; to its growth, but believe that if
the new city is to achieve its major purpose it should have
at least 300,000 people. And this growth will be planned / 2 
-2-
to ensure a auality of life at the highest level; Pollution
will be controlled: The environment protected.
The economic benefits of this development must pass
to the people of Australia. Large sums of public money must
be spent. ' e believe that this can give a good return but
we must ensure that the return is to the community at large
and is not tapped off to provide an unearned ain to land
speculators. ie want land to be cheap and its use to be
controlled in such a way that the new city is both beautiful
and efficient. ' JI also want home ownership in the new city
to be less of a burden to families than it has become in the
major Australian cities. To th: is end the Common. wealth believes
that the leasehold system must. prevail.
From the beginning of this major project, we want local
people to be involved in its planning and operation. ' Je hope
that the machinery w hich is devined to develop and operate this
new city will, in at least some respects, become a model for
future local and regional Governmento
The Australian Government has available in the
.' ational Capital Development Commission and the ilTational Urban
and legional Development authority the fund of technical
expertise which has conceived, planned and built in Canberra,
the only substantial new Australian city of our time. For
historical and constitutional reasons we have had a particular
connection with the Murray Ilivcro The Commonwealth will be
associated with supplying the quantity of water required by
the now city through the Snowy Mountains Authority and the
œ ivcr Murray Commission.
Let me outline now the steps my Government has already
taken to ensure the success of this ventureo
The Postmaster-General's Department has been instructed
to prepare a report on the cost of recognising Albury-Wodonga
as an extension of the iMetropolitan area of both Sydney and
Melbourne, for the purpose of heeping telephone and telex charges
at a suitable level for industry.
The Australian Universities Commission and the
Australian Council of Advanced Education have, as I have already
indicated in my letters to Sir Robert Askin and Mr. Ilamer on
the 15th of December, been instructed to confer and report on
the provision of tertiary education facilities in this area.
In accordance with the recommendations of Sir Henry
Bland on the Victorian Land Transport System, the Bureau of
Transport E: conomics has been instructed to investigate the
impact of inter-system rating practices on rail traffic from
the Riverina. All Departments in the Federal Government have been
asked to investigate the possibility of locating divisions of
the Public Service in Albury-Wodonga / 3 
-3-
The new Department of Tourism and Recreation has
been instructed to investigate tourist development in Albury-
Wodonga and to recommend a program for increasing it.
Finally, as you are aware, my Government is committed
to amending the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act to give local
authorities access to the Commission. We propose to encourage
all relevant local authorities in the Albury-Wodonga area to
consult and co-operate in preparing such a submission on -a
regional basis. The new Department of Urban Affairs and
Regional Development will make its expert advisers available
to any co-operative effort among the local authorities.
I do not wish to anticipate the detailed decisions
that will flow from this meeting, but I trust we will reach
common agreement on our objectives, and set in motion a
feasibility study of the project. I hope we will reach
agreement upon the general structure and essential powers
of the tripartite development authority, on the structure
of consultation an%' supervision at Ministerial level, and
the procedure for involvement of local authorities.
I am grateful to the Governments of New South Wales
and Victoria for their generous co-operation in-this scheme
and for the valuable work they have already done to ensure
its success. Let us bend all our efforts to work in harmony
together and achieve our aims. None of us here is indifferent
to the present sprawling growth of our major cities, with all
the waste, the pollution, the inefficiency they bring, and the
baneful effect of their unchecked growth on the living standards
of our people. Here is a chance, in the most literal sense, to
build for tomorrow and improve the lives not only of the people
of this region, but of other cities, today and in times to come. 



AUSTRALIAN~ INSTITUTE OF POLITICAL SCIENCE
SUITER SCHOOL CAN~ BERRA
27 January 1973
Opening Address by the Prime Minister, the Hon. E. G. Whitlam,
M. P.
It is a happy coincidence that this Summer School on Australia's
international relations should open on such a momentous day in the
history of our region and of the world the day tof the ceasefire in
Vie t-Nam. A generation of war and havoc and suffering lies behind us.
The problems ahead, in Viet-Nam, in Indo-China and in the region are
immense. They will tax statemanship to the limit, yet it is impossible
at such a time, on such a day, not to feel a sense of profound relief
and profound hope and a sense of excitement at the new opportunity which
this week's historic events have opened up for us all. It is in the
context of change, of hope, of new opportunities that I put my remarks
in opening the Summer School.
On 2 December the nation changed its government, but did not
and could not by that act change the essential foundations of its foreign
/ 2 
-2-
policy. Australia's national interests did not change. Australia's
international obligations did not change. Australia's alliances and
friendships did not change. Nonetheless, the change is real and deep
because what has altered is the perception and interpretation of thosa
interests, obligations and friendships by the elected government. The
essential change is that the views and policies of the Australian
Government working within the same framework of facts as its
predecessors are now those of the Australian Labor Party. The
Australian Government acts on a mandate given to it by the Australian
people. On 2 December that mandate was given clearly to the Australian
Labor Party. I make these remnarks at the outset not to strike a partisan
note, but to place on record a simple, obvious but powerful fact which
should never be forgotten at home or abroad, neither by our opponents
here nor our friends abroad.
The mandate of the Labor Government was abundantly clear on
specific matters of our foreign relations. In the Policy Speech we did
not for instance say just in general terms that we would work for
normalisation of relations with the People's Republic of China. We said
specifically " The Labor Government will transfer Australia's China Embassy
from Taipei to Peking." We have done so. We did not just say that we
would deplore resumption of French nuclear tests in the Pacific. We said
" We will take the question of French nuclear tests to the International
Court of Justice." We preparing to do so. We did not just say that we
deplored racial-selection of sporting teams. We said " We will give no
visas to or through Australia to racially selected sporting teams."
We shall not. 
Beyond, however, these and other quite specific pledges, there
were other great matters which were stated more generally and yet which
must be given commanding force and weight if we are to take our mandate
seriously. For example, the reference in my Policy Speech to Viet-N~ tm
was relatively brief and general. This was not just because in November
the ceasefire then seemed much closer than it turned out. It was
because there was not a matter in the whole range of policy domestic
or foreign on which the intentions and determination of the Australian
Labor Party and an Australian labor Government ran so deep, clear and
straight. But on three great matters the three relevant matters for an
Australian political party or an Australian government there had never
been any doubt about the attitude of my Party. Those principles were:
opposition to Australia's military involvement; opposition to the
bombing of North Viet-Nam; and, thirdly, a determination to use
Australia's influence to end the war.
From 28 April 1965 the day Sir Robert Menzies announced the
sending of the first battalion these three attitudes had never been in
doubt nor in question at any level of the Australian Labor Party. Nobody
could be under any illusion that once we had formed a government we would
delay for a day or an hour in acting upon these policies and these
principles upon this mandate.
Yet our mandate and duty to maintain the American alliance was
equally clear. This we will do. The ending of American intervention in
Indo-China will remove the really serious difference between the two
administrations. There will be another result of profound importance.
The end of intervention with all the bitterness and dissension it
brought will free the spirit and energies of the American people and
help mightily to restore the United States to her proper and constructive 
-4-
role as the world's most generous and idealistic nation. But let me also
say this:-At no time in the eighteen years since the United States began
her military commitment in Indo-China, or in the ten years since Australia
first sent advisers there, or in the eight years since Australia
committed troops on the ground in strength, or in the seven years since
the bombing of North Viet-Nam began, has it ever been suggested by any
President, by any Prime Minister, by any responsible Congressman that
Australia's attitude to the war in Viet-Nam or any phase in the war in
Viet-Namn was a condition of the continuation of ANZUS. There is no
such suggestion now. ANZUS is a legal embodiment of the common interests
of the people of Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Those
interests remain constant beyond changes of administration in Washington,
Wellington or Canberra.
It is true that the changed Australian attitude to Viet-Namn
did lead to an alteration in the degree of consultation on American policy
in Viet-Nam between Washington and Canberra. That alteration had nothing
to do with the change of government. It occurred under the previous
government as the Australian commitment waE. wound down. As the
significance of the Australian commitment lessened, the less Australia
was told and the previous government did not and could not complain.
But this was an alt,-, ration related solely to Viet-Nam. It had nothing
to do with ANZUS.
However, for all its enduring importance, adherence to ANZUS
does not in itself constitute a foreign policy. It is a treaty at the
centre of our relations with only two nations, albeit one our closest
partner and the other the world's greatest power. Yet insofar as
ANZUS represents a security guarantee in the ultimate peril, reliance
upon it as the sole objective of our foreign policy would in fact place
our foreign policy in suspension until the peril emerged. 
The real test of a successful foreign policy is the extent to
which a balance is struck and kept between a naition's commitment and a
nation's power. The United States herself now accepts that its cold
war commitment to global containment of Communism represented a gross
over-extension of her real power. This was one of the inexorable lessons
of Viet-Nam. To see the change which has occurred because of Viet-Nam
it is enough to compare the circumspection of President Nixon's second
Inaugural with the sweeping rhetoric of John Kennedyts Inaugural with
its vision of an unlimited universal acceptance of burdens by the
United States. In my Policy Speech I said:
" A nation's foreign policy depends on striking a wise, proper
and prudent balance between commitment and power. Labor will have four
commitments commensurate to our power and resources;
" First our own national security;
" Secondly a secure, united and friendly
Papua New Guinea;
" Thirdly achieve closer relations with our
nearest and largest neighbour,
Indonesia;
" Fourthly promote the peace and prosperity
of our neighbourhood."
The fourth of those is, of course, an extremely general
proposition. Yet Australia's actual situation in our region makes it a
meaningful objective for an Australian Foreign Policy. It is a
commitment realistically commensurate with our power, our resources and
our interests. 
-6-
Australia's actual situation is this: We are far and away the
richest nation in the neighbourhood. We have a gross national product
equal to that of all the countries between the Bay of Bengal and the South
China Sea. Those countries have twenty times our population. We ar3 an
island continent with one of the most formidable natural defences in the
world. We have no serious conflict of interests with any of our
neighbours and there are no foreseeable conflicts likely to arise well
beyond this decade.
We have an assured economic partnership a relationship of
interdependence, not dependence with Japan, the strongest power in the
wider region. Both Australia and Japan are moving swiftly into an
area of better understanding with the largest power, China.
If I appear to be placing such great emphasis on the rosier
aspects of our present situation, it is because I wish to contrast the
new realities with the old fears, shibboleths and suspicions. One
might say, with Canning, in a very different context ana very different
sense, " I call the new world into existence in order to redress the
balance of the old." I hasten to say that absolutely no significance
whatever is to be attached to my preferring Canning above Metternich.
Tc give an independent view from the other side of the world
I quote from the " Guardian" of 15 January:-
" Australia is the richest most powerful and most advanced
country in a part of the world that is otherwise empty of influential
states. It is proper and healthy that Australian policy should reflect
this political and economic fact.
" But until the new government came along a succession of
governments in Canberra had tended to accept for Australia a more
dependent status than the country actually enjoys. Since the Second
World War Australians and Americans have understood each other and have 
-7-
depended upon each other to a degree that was unknown before Pearl Harbour.
But friendship between Australia and America does not require Australia
to be subservient." I am determined that under this Government the Australian. people
will be encouraged to shed the old stultifying fears and animosities which
have encumbered the national spirit for generations and dominated, often
for domestic partisan purposes, the foreign policy of this nation.
The other great theme our Government will wish to stress both
with the great powers and our neighbours is that with the end of foreign
intervention in Viet-Nam the region has a second chance. The West threw
away an opportunity for a settlement in 1954 after Korea, after Geneva.
I believe the United States, the Soviet Union, Japan and China are
determined not to let the second opportunity slip because assuredly it
will not be offered a third time. In particular the Australian
Government will discourage at all levels the kind of thinking which
would place North Viet-Nam in the role of the new antagonist as a
replacement for China and which wiould place Thailand in the role assigned
to South Viet-Namn in the early ' 60' s. Accordingly, we shall support
the ASEAN proposal for a zone of peace and neutrality in South East
Asia and encourage the other countries involved in the region to endorse
the proposition. I have spoken on several occasions in recent months of the
great importance wie attach to the development of our relations with
Indonesia and stressed it in the Policy Speech. The importance of
Indonesia to Australia is indisputable. We need, however, to see the
development of ) ur relations with Indonesia within the wider South
Ehst Asian regional context. I do not want to give the impression that
by giving priority to our relations with Indonesia we would do so at
-/ 8 
the expense of our relations with other ASEAN countries. Indonesia is,
of course, closer geographically and much larger than the other members.
But our standing in other regional countries is not irrelevant to the
importance which Indonesia will attach to Australia. In the same way
as our destiny is inseparable from Indonesia, so Indonesia cannot
separate her own destiny from those of her immediate neighbours to
the north in ASEAN. So the continued development of our relations with
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines is important not only
in the wider regional context, but in the context of our own relations
with Indonesia. We see our relations with Indonesia as complementary
to and not in any way competitive with her or our relationships with
other ASEAN countries. This is what I mean in saying that in giving
priority to the development of our relations with Indonesia we are
not doing this at the expense of our relations with the other ASEAN
countries. I might sum up our general approach to the affairs of our
region by stating the situation I expect to exist by 1975. With New
Zealand, relations wrill have grown even closer through a series of
co-operative endeavours to promote the welfare and harmony of the
South Pacific. We shall have as our close neighbour an independent Papua
New Guinea which will have for the rest of this century the first call
on our substantially increased foreign aid programme. We shall be
working closely in co-operation with the Government of Papu~ a New Guinea
through a specific and guaranteed economic programme.
We do not see any immediate threat of external aggression
to the countries of South East Asia. We do not want to look on South
East Asia as a front line in terms of the old cliche of forward defence. 
-9-
We do not see South East Asia as a frontier where we might fight nameless
Asian enemies as far to the north of' our owm shores as possible in
other people's backyards.
To meet the new realities and our perception of them we shall
be seeking new forms of regional co-operation. In its present form,
ASPAC no longer reflects those realities. In particular, the continued
presence of Taiwan makes ASPAC anacronistic. Three of ASPAC's members
Australia, New Zealand and Japan recognise Peking as the sole legal
government of China. We will not be withdrawing immediately from ASPAC
although we consider that unless there is a change in its present
membership, it cannot function effectively or continue for very long.
In Wellington the New Zealand Prime Minister and I expressed
our intention to work with our Asian and Pacific neighbours in making
adjustments to existing arrangements and seeking new forms of co-operation.
We shall be consulting with our neighbours including Indonesia, Japan
and others before any final decisions are reached on how we should
proceed. There is no question of seeking to change or enlarge ASEAN.
We should like to see all our ASEAN neighbours in a larger regional
association for Asia and the Pacific, but ASEAN itself is a sub-regional
grouping which is doing valuable work and any enlargement of the
organisation is a matter for its members.
Regional co-operation will be one of the keystones of
Australia's foreign policy for the 701s. We shall be charting a new
course with less emphasis on military pacts. It will be based on an
independent outlook in foreign affairs and will be directed towards a
new regional community geared to the realities of the
The guidelines of the regional community that I foresee will
be an organisation genuinely representative of the region, without / io 
ideological overtones, conceived as an initiative to help free the region
of great power rivalries that have bedevilled its progress for decades
and designed to insulate the region against ideological interference
from the great powers.
I do not intend that Australia should try to impose a detailed
formulation for setting up such a community and we shall not seek to
intrude beyond our realistic capacity to participate and assist in the
realisation of this concept. We shall be patient and punctilious in our
consultation and prepared at every turn to take account of and participate
in the genuine aspirations of the region. But we shall be active in
seeking this end. I have already initiated efforts in the relevant
Departments of my Government and I shall continue to advance this concept
as an earnest of Australia's genuine interest in the developmnent of a truly
representative regional community.
I conclude by expressing our profound satisfaction that this
auspicious day should mark a new beginning or at the very least a chance
for a new beginning in our region. I take it as a happy omen indeed that
this should have occurred so early in the life of the new Australian
Government. Events of this week add a new importance and a new dimension
to this Summer School. Australians like yourselves who wish to help us
frame new policies and take the debate on foreign affairs to a new level
can now do so free of the overwhelming preoccupation of Viet-Nam.
I have long stressed that a Labor Government would seek and welcome
the help of Australians in framing our policies at all levels. Your views
and ideas are doubly welcome at this time. 



3'-
TEXT OF STATEMIENT BY THE PRIMTE 1MINISTER, M E. G. WIHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE HAV1KESBIJRY BY-ELECTION, 9 REGET
THEATRE, RICH-MOND, VWEDNESDAY 31 JANUARY 1973
The Statc of New South ales has just experienced a crippling
and unnecessary industrial dispute involving the Transport Workers
Union. The conflict involved was basically an intra-union matter
which should not have expanded into strike action affecting the
entire commiunity. The fact that an intra-union matter could grow--
to such proportions arises from a basic defect in our legislation,
a defect which has been knovm for three years and upon which the
previous Federal Government and the State Government, particularly
that of New South Wales, should have overcome some time ago.
The recent dispute involved an application by the New South
Wales union to be represented separately in the arbitration
proceedings and to negotiate directly with the employers. This
dispute could only arise because the State and Federal unions had a
quite separate cxistence in the eyes of the law.
On 25 February 1969 the full bench of the Commonwealth
Industrial Court handed down its judgement in Moore v. Doyle,
par of which read: " A system of trade union organisation is
urgently needed which would enable the one body to represent it's
relevant members in both the Federal and State arbitration systems
and it should be possible for Federal and State authorities to
examine the quostion whether organisations and trade unions can be
provided with such a system We have decided to refer our
judgement in this matter and these remarks to the Attorney-General
for the Commonwealth in the hope that it may be possible, after
consultation between Commonwealth and State Attorneys-General, the
trade unions, both Federal and State, and other interested Government
authorities to arrange for the examination of the important
organisational matters to which we have referred". I should point
out that a member of the court in this diecision was Mr. Justice Kerr,
now the Chief Justice of Newi South Wales*
Four years ago the Court referred this vital matter to the
Federal and State Attorneys-General. During this period a series
of committee meetings and sub-committee meetings has been held.
At a meeting on 16 and 17 March 1972 the working party completed its
work and definite proposals by the Commonwealth were forwarded to
the States on 13 June 1972. Only four States are involved,
South Australia, Western Australia, Queensland and New South W. ales.
Replies were received from South Australia on 23 August, from
Western Australia on 31 August and from Queensland on 8 September.
New South Wales is the only State which has not yet replied to the
Commonwealth proposals.
The recent strike should never have occurred. It would not
have arisen if the previous Federal Government and the State
Government involved had not been so dilatory in remedying this basic
and obvious defect in our laws. The fact that the matter is not
resolved at this time is solely the responsibility of the New South
Wales State Government.
I have now written to all the State Premiers involved seeking
urgent consideration of this basic legal anomaly to ensure that
disputes of this kind will never again erupt -to cause such
inconvenience to the commnunity. 



SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME MINISTER, TI-HON. E. G. :. TITLAM, O. C.,
TO A DINER GIVEN BY TEV L LAiD DEVELOPME'lNT COiHFEUNC
OF VICTORIA, MELBOU2i-E, 13 FEBRUARY 1973
The decisive issue at the last election was the future
of our cities. It was the response of those who must live in
those cities particularly the growing areas of Melbourne and
Sydney which decided the outcome. The national swing to my
party was about In outer Sydney and Melbourne it was never
less than 5% and as high as 11%. Cities and city life became
one of the great issues in a national election campaign because
the Australian Labor Party believed that the national Government
must increasingly share with State and local Government
responsibility for rebuilding our existing cities and building
new ones. That was the central theme of my campaign.
You will forgive me if I quote myself, but I do so only
to re-affirm my central conviction of the mlevance of the cities
to practically every other national issue which Australia must
face. I said in the Policy Speech:
" Increasingly, a citizen's real standard of living,
the health of himself and his family, his children's
opportunities for education and self-improvement,
his access to employment opportunities, his ability
to enjoy the Nation's resources for recreation and
culture, his ability to participate in the discussions
and activities of the community are determined not by
the hours he works, but by where he lives. This is
why Labor believes that the National Government must
involve itself directly in cities. Practically every
major national problem relates to cities."
Believing this, we have moved promptly to implement our
undertakings. A Department of Urban and Regional Development has
already been created. It will be a major policy department of the
Government. It is to have a creative, initiating and coordinating
role in policy as well as an administrative responsibility for the
application of that policy.
The department will have a responsibility for creating
a National Urban strategy a statement of a national attitude
to urban and regional growth, a statement of priorities in the
urban field and a guideline statement for Government and private
action. This strategy will be concerned with the future of all
urban areas, old as well as new.
I am reminded of the definition of an urban planner as
a person who rearranges the deck chairs on ' The Titanic'. Despite
the tone of fatalism that is often reflected in debate on urban
affairs, I am convinced that we can that we must succeed.
! e are all in the same boat whatever its name. 
-2-
ee should not be discouraged by the failures of the past.
" here is a new factor which should not be underestimated: the full
resources and expertise of the Australian Government are now committed
to the task. While the Labor administration is mindful of the important
contribution the various State Governments can mlake towards determining
national iolicies on the cities and regions, we reject the implicit
. ownradin of the role of the iational Government. The shibboleth
of States rights must no lone or be used as an excuse to deny the rights
of the majori of itrlians. Certainly, we know that only with
ta:; c co-ou'eration will we be able to solve the problems of the cities.
WTe recognise, however, that the iational Government must
involve itself in the problems of all urban areas, the old as Iwell as
the ne, the existing cities as much as the new ones which we believe
must be built before the end of this century.
If I night again refer to the Policy Speech my colleague,
hr. Deazley, refers to it as the Hew Testament to distinguish it from
the Old Testament embodied in the Party platform I said:
" A Labor Government will have two over-riding objectives
to give Australian mfailios access to land and housing
at fair prices and to Preserve and enhance the quality
of the national estate of which land is the very foundation."
There should be no doubt about our c. termination to halt the
rise in land prices. There is scarcely an undertahirng we gave to which
we are so firmly committed. Te are convinced that if any serious
effort is to be made to et land prices down, then Governments must
participate in the buying, development and leasing or selling of
residential land. It is a practice long accepted in most comnparable
countries. Yet because it has not been the Australian eractice I
presume because it was regarded as socialism the price of land in
every State capital has more than trebled in the last decade. Tha
Comonwealth Banking Corporation has conducted periodic surveys of
land prices. Thcy show that in ieolbourne between 1968 and 1971 the
average price for a block of land which the Banh classified as modest,
increased by In Canberra, alone the local authority which happens to be
the 1ational Government owined, develoed and leased the residential
land. In Canberra clone were prices held stable. Two years ago the
rules were changed and the result was Canberra exerienced last year
the most expensive land boom in Australia. So, at no gain to the
community, hundreds of Australians obli ed to live in Canberra for
their living, are being needlessly &gt; urdened by high land prices.
Conversely, hundreds of thousands of Australians can be saved millions
if only the Commoronwealth will make grants to the States to enable
then to acquire, sub-divide, develop and sell or lease at cost
substantial tracts of housing land. , Te prooose to do it. 
-3-
exeineaob ' r nicat es tlie value leaseold
tenv.'' e systIem. This Has n ow boon a. cce-pted boy b oth1 theI o 1ecu S o uth alS
adVictorian Gcvernments. " Th areem ent sir: need at klbury on
Ja: 2ar' r mse12X e Siir :.. oort ksldn c, -I) es
is t t1e-' oe evelo int corp: orat'ion., unless
0 1e, 0ae Cx. 1ce-tio: 1al circumstances, will -follow C, policy
o2 DrOvicin,, -2u ly serviced sites for develolment on a
lon--terri le as eh-. oIdC tenure, normally, 99 er"
heeis tes-) ecial : roblem ofL la-nd sl'eculatJ--ion-. in alreas
dosi-atd or conecnt ated development. In tHese ccases thIc duty o: L
UG-Overnm-Kent s to 2ct' is c ear and ine s c) cb 1be.
I w. elcomec th'-e a ction o2 h South Australian Goverj] meont, whica.
in h1. arcil 197" 2 in-roduced lo-islation to stabilise land_ 6 -oricos in -U-ao
area-th-e Tpro-osoJ neO, Tr town of'Kray n I welcoime.-the announc eiment
on 17 Januar-, y thsyear by theI'aJ ost Asrla: Governmenrt to cont-Irol
land, prices-in an aranorthI' ofL 2erthl. iLy Government is particularly
heartenbC. by theo action: o-f te ! Tiu South Talos Governmoei,. in pro-, osinr-,
theI~ st-aUI, i7i -sati on o$ l2c1 pr ic cs in the'.. Go s ford JTonr IeCnai-o13s1orth,
1o actiAon by the Ir South71 Uales Gover.-fmntw followsta
Cecision-th-,? e utrinowSouth61 *. Talos adVictLorian oen ns
at thi criotin-.,, in-7 JA-L ry-.' To'o on-2' Jnur o sta-bilise ln
in that,, area at values a~ li.' on~ 3 October 197,2. '. he_
recmonsitkAd a lbtury-JToeon: ncue the1-foll owing unaribi-Lious
: 2ot be allowed6 tU'o ~ r&gt; 6 the-. Succoss th-e pro-oct a-nd
it is notl intenoJdd to b1uy land a prices whlich-rellect th6e1
incremr-t in. val ue arsij romteineed evoret
o--th new : otncorleu.-
The -) ric e o2 la7-nd to0 be0 a'cGired ' for the: I ) Ur~ oscs o1ft _. e
p~ roec withU-'-in the,.' ra -J. iinltld be0 ba3se_ Onl1t he
maktlevel of' o. rices -p-evailin-S cat te date of 3 Octo'ber
19 7, buiihay icossary ad: juUti17iIn t o0 r1 Cen era lan7d
p0ricechne ( ut fatr other-than thn ao er t
of the devolo-. ymentv' of-2' he' cori.) loe:-) dui: 7i. Criod U-0
to the sate ofC a-ctQual-1-a u -c. rchs e.
111e ! rinciple of 11hatn-land ) rice corols is Cr,
ac Co0, Y 0C. notu only, by the nlew 7, abor-Government-.' 1 but ' y the Libea I
I sho uld( adI-f: a urt., er vri~ h ~ toa Jbnao
2eDiovnea l~ met uthri ~ Tis reetvcoin( uciA7r,' a nu.: n br o:"
stUrfieJs in a num. I'er OIL aeswicmy eSuitaj" DIC 201--Lu-U._ e d0v0clo-) iment._
Th ac ffesbiiystd s nnowytob as a. Governmeont
iion to su-) port some -DL-rtVicu-, 7r cent-Ire for ute rOn. Cwleodr'e
_-1s-_ c1 atufdy isbi; care is aO.-D-oory ba,-sis for
CP e -01. t n n land. n cI -ch an'rea., rh o n umi; rj 0 1 0St'ud_ i e S
i: 2~ 1aedsholdbe sufcin oof o0 that 
In , ivir_ eewanns-A ~ 2O dloln't want, it
to be thou-! it tat I ': eliovo h ltand s-poculation is teonly problem
lor our Policy Of limiltin heesalix of Aus trcliani rosieontacl
. Ll" pziccs. It hIas booen theo no; lect andi apath-y of O" overnmcnts,
not th1 a,( c tio-' rivat citizen-s, w-H ich-1ha-ve mde_ theo -rice of an
an husn hesoil a-WZ. cconoriiic roroblem it is today. At t&gt;. el core
of tLh e ~ rbc as been th dwrain of local adscmi-overr: 1nt
by both ' a17 . dr] State-oL-G overn--__ mcnts. V 3ecause of the-i lack1 ol a-douau
a" ccess tU'o -1 fi Linciañ, resoorces, = nd Sei-Govornrment
autnriti z: c c c-Ci te Unn-zalo to ; orovide the'i scrvices fLor w -ica-, nIy
are ronn~. I0 ILIeSe communjjjity-s crvi Ccs a rc too f2requently roc: uLJroed
Of Ldevolopcrs, Or e vec n r s c no'tu rovided La all. In thei fce ofL
te lmite sply of serviced landfoce
) ricCe 0 km-arcs i-. y Governrmont is ersett so4o. r: iodta
Couicillorz n ldre will haersosblte ncti~ up thenationalcak1e
Of ', orro'Tin[; a7s rnieprnr n~ n drlsiti
kus-L-rcalia a.. Is 900"' local ' Govo rnrmiont ' 0oCis he bocics
selC~ om c-' eaeon a. re'in asis arid t-oo oft wve to co1-ircte'-
for : eosources with. in their* 1 OUZn rerjon. wjoe l -Isn r'~ i~ i2[ local
Governo orncu e tto on: th Loan:: Council, we -oropose to amencl
t&gt;. e Cor~ n. el&gt; G~ t eiszion ActU' So that h Comi. iion wi~ lI
be involved in nrmtn~ ec 1b) eiWOyO 0: n rc:' ion1s LIS .2ith r o betweoen
tUe State t wil beo recoucs ted t1o :. ccor~ f. 1orien the%. rn.: ouzat o2 Comz-ion-ce'. lth"
ascisteance needed-t'o rei-iov-re the inocualit-ies of soe: Vicinr-. ceovolopin3
' 2. r G~ b-r ierne -, iss o 2o-~ ha1m~ eo re jirect role
i -in es! urinL 1 avaibiity of l-2 Inz, my Pfolicy Speech-i propose
the creat-Cion ofL a Comm1ronwalhStt Lan Dvelo-pme. 1ntU Co] Missiol in7
each1 Stae, o caccu-iro subostantuial tra-cts o' landZ in new , arned-st o
lea-se or Sell ati cost fully service h--ousinrj-blocks. In this roc
we SOO. k the-fu-ll co-oiocration o' tt Governmentar_-s and I Have alr edy
written-to the'-, Premiers on this r.~ tter.
I want o ei'-_ 7setht hre is
in,. crea-se !) ye pthoe~: bitiiotn a Governmeint sho uld mean
Eiminishe opot ' t -, or -rivate dovelo: ers. On thI onrrybeolieve
cur rain L terestU s lin . and1 a-nd ha we sha1rea
com-mon in-teresct in-oitn' &gt; eealt n fcienr o u ii
iheG overme: 1t r: Objective is tht ve,:, r utainfml
ehuble abl t. 1oo ob:) t ainl and-% Ousin at re a Sonale pr ice0s. 2i
is sre~ i~ you:. r interest. Otir ob. etv is tatLoaan e: i
GovernIMent sh-oule. have adeuate a. ccess to the. -ITio:.-ffis:: anc e s. i'i
i -Tour inte-e, sOt Cur-0,7 obictive is thtLocal-Gov rnme nt
shudable t-o -oor'orr.-its ro-ec~-c ) ins and6 y) rovide mod-ern
a eiAcL. services-or resic-ents candc oai~ jr-, Tisi srl
in. y or -net. Oo o-: etiv is tUo. reduc nU-1 ti-icity ofL
s ~ zsad oesw: cns edlessly 7dC. o cost of la,-nd an,-(
h-osn: iJ _ 3 2i 10i1, er inerst Or bective is tohveuane
and c1imn te *. e. r0ho1e o _ 10Fas10 erip i s a sourlce o2. ea
o: rid. e rahr thnuno1ndcing-adc utn rutain is inioi 
If I may, I will roaovCt sonothing i said in this sca. me place
to your conforence in june S1O
" Tie Srcnt con-tribution 7rhich Sevoloers can ad Should nce
to the crction and recreation of our cities is to ascsnble
and co-ordinato ch varied resources and slills of te
surveyor, nrchitoct, quantity surveyor, builder, trcaosnaa,
c. cs 2 nor, lanscapcr, in-terior aecorator c~ nn to soe tin. t
finance is cvailcble fron a. bank, insurance cor. mpny, building.
society or oolicior. You of these speciclists can cpply
their shilo ns ll in isolation no tcy can apply them
tho acis of a ccveloper. Very fou homnebuildrs can,
siaLJc--n: Lec nosemblo sucz skills ns Voll s a cevelopr
can assenblo them."
I believe we can havC citics A2 which we can be 2.: roul and
biulilaing theni I belicve Avoeioaers can -Ky a role of which t-er can
be proud throurh a callin of2 which they can be proud. 



SPEECH DELIVERED BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
At a Dinner attended by the Government of Papua New Guinea.
PORT MORESBY 18 February 1973
Mr Chief Minister, I suppose one would be less
than human if one did not feel some measure of gratification
at the recent changes in our personal and political situations:
all I need say, Chief Minister, is that we have both come a
long way from the lounge of the Sepik Hotel at Wewak in
January 1970, when we were both virtually under seige and
when we were both deemed in certain quarters to be committing
political suicide by daring to talk about early independence
for Papua New Guinea.
I may say, Chief Minister, thatthe courage and
foresight you showed in those years marked you as a coming
man and as a genuine leader of your people. It is a deep
personal pleasure to me as well as a matter of great pride
that you and I shall be working together in the coming years
in the great work of creating a new nation in the South
Pacific, this nation of Papua New Guinea.
In the whole of modern history there is only a
select band of men and women to whom such a task has been
entrusted, and you Chief Minister, have joined with lustre
and honour the chosen few who have led their people to
nationhood. In the few short years since 1970 when even
self-govenrment, much less independence, was scarcely to be
mentioned in polite circles, Papua New Guinea had a piece of
unexpected good fortune. I refer to the appointment of Andrew
Peacock as the Australian Minister for External Territories.
I am glad, here, to pay my public tribute tL-o him and his work,
as I have in Australia. I have been lable to appoint an
admirable successor in Bill Morrison who, one way and another,
has had a remarkeable record in working himself out of a job
and that, of course, is the duty of the Minister for External
Territories. I was never a believer in the idea that the
Australian political parties should adopt thfroughout the early
a bipartisan approach on the future of Papua New Guinea.
I am convinced that the attempt to do so did great harm in
those years. Too often, Australian apathy, Australian arrogance,
Australian indifference masqueraded as a national consensus.
Nevertheless, what was a disadvantage in the ' 60' s could well
be an advantage in the mid ' 70' s as Papua New Guinea emerges
towards independence. Andrew Peacock did go a long way towards
restoring the consensus a genuine, progressive, concerned
consensus, not the phoney consensus of the
There are now three great areas of agreement among
the Australian political parties about Papua New Guinea's future.
The first is that a timetable for self-government and independence
must be set, and that essential elements for the timing of the
decision are the views and wishes of the House of Assembly. / 2 
As the Chief Minister and Mr Peacock agreed,
resolutions of the House on important issues should be by
recorded vote and by a substantial majority representative
of the nation as a whole. My Government reaffirms that
position. I cannot stress too often that the decision for
independence is not only a decision about Papua New Guinea.
It is about Australia and Australia's view of her own proper
role in the world. Australia is no longer willing to be the
ruler of a colony. And my Government is determined to divest
itself of that role in the lifetime of the present Australian
Parliament. The second area of firm agreement is that
Australia's aid to Papua New Guinea will continue after
independence. You will recall, Chief Minister, that in
my visits in 1970 and 1971,1 made the most solemn pledges
to your people on this matter. The pledges that I made to
your people ae as binding upon me, my Party and my Government
as any undertaking I have given to my own people in seeking
their support. I am acutely aware of the fact that if I had
not given these undertakings in 1970 and in 1971, the cause
of independence could never have made its spectacular progress
in the past three years. I repeat thzt-undertaking now.
The Australian Government has decided to give the
Papua New Guinea Government an assurance of continuing aid over
the period of the three year Improvement Program beginning in
1974/ 75. The detailed arrangements to give effect to this
assurance will be formulated in connection with the preparation
of the Improvement Program. These arrangements will, of course,
need to provide for review during the period of the Program as
necessary in the light of changing circumstances.
Papua New Guinea will have the first call on our
substantially increased foreign aid programme. We shall be
working with the Papua New Guinea Government through a specific
and guaranteed ' programme.
The third area of complete agreement between the
Australian political parties is that it is Australia's duty
and responsibility to hand over to the Central Government and
the House of Assembly a united Papua New Guinea.
My Government's policy, and it was the policy of
the late Government, is to hand over our remaining powers to
a national and representative government, freely elected by
the people of the whole of Papua New Guinea and able to
represent the wishes of the majority of the people. Relations
between our two countries will be conducted through the National
Government in Canberra and the Central Government of Papua New
Guinea. Australian aid will be allocated solely through the
Central Government. / 3 
On 20 December 1971 the United Nations General
Assembly, by resolution, urged Australia to discourage separatist
movements and to ensure that the unity of Papua New Guinea is
preserved throughout tne period leading up to independence.
On 14 December last year the General Assembly again reaffirmed
" the importance of ensuring the preservation of unity."
I know we cannot underestimate the difficulties in
maintaining unity. I know the strength of tribal and regional
feelings. These ties and loyalties are themselves valuable
an essential ingredient in the life and culture of the nation.
But if Papua New Guinea is to survive, if it is to progress, if
it is to find an honourable and honoured place among the nations
of the world, if it is to have an effective voice in the affairs
of our region, then the Central 6overnment and the House of
Assembly must have sufficient powers over the whole nation to plan
for the nation and to speak for the nation.
I hope you won't think it patronising of me to
remind you that Australia herself a federation of states
has problems in dealing with national matters. For example,
you will know the difficulties and delays we have met in
carrying out our determination to negotiate between our two
countries in the Torres Strait. Even in a country as developed
and sophisticated as Australia, one hears from time to time
rumbings and mumblings about secession. But it is folly for
anybody to believe that any section of Papua New Guinea would
serve its interests by going it alone. For it would truly mean
going it alone. Soon I shall be leaving for a visit to our great
neighbour, Indonesia. It's worthwhile reflecting that that
country has faced similar problems of diversity of cultures
and customs and suspicion from time to time of the Central
Governm1~ ent. But Indonesia is an example of one of the
outstanding facts of the post-colonial era. Newly independent
countries in Asia and Africa have made extraordinary exertions
to maintain the integrity of the borders inherited from their
colonial rulers. For such countries those borders are regarded
as the very foundation of the legitimacy of their government,
as the very guarantee and symbol of their independence, and of
their nationhood. It must be so with Papua New Guinea.
The members of this Government and the members of
the House of Assembly have, as I have said, a tremendous and
difficult task ahead. But it is a task of great honour and
privilege to be in truth the founding fathers of your nation.
You are writing a great page in your nation's
history. In Australia you have an assured friend and I believe
we shall forge a true partnership to the great advantage of
both our countries and for the welfare of both our peoples. 



DEATMN OF
NQ DATE
M/ 34 20 February 1973
EMBARGOED for release until
0001 hours Wednesday 21 February.
PRIME MINISTER TN INDONESIA
Following is the text of an address by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, at a
State banquet given by the Government of Indonesia in Jakarta
tonight, Tuesday, 20 February:-
" I regard this occasion as a narticularly hapry omeifor
me and my Government. It is one that brings me a special
personal satisfaction. T1his is my eighth visit to Indonesia,
and my first as Prime Minister of Australia. Apart from a
brief visit to New Zealand, this is my first visit as Prime
Mini'ster to an independent neighbourinE country.
This is not by chance. Relations between Australia
and Indonesia have always been cordial and strong. It is my
Government's intention that they will become stronger still.
I stressed this during the recent elections. The Australian
people have endorsed the objective. Individually there is much
our tw. o countries can achieve for the welfare of our region.
There is even more that we can achieve together. 
-2-
In visiting Indonesia I am most pleased by the
opportunity to renew personal contact with President Soeharto.
I attach great importance to establishing relations of mutual
confidence with him. I deeply admire his qualities of leadership
which combine dignity and realism with great positive
achievements. Under President Soeharto Indonesia's course
has steadied and become firm. This is a source of great hope
and encouragement to Australia.
What, Mr President, lies at the basis of this confident
relationship that we have? We can hardly be more different in
history, in size, both of population and area, in cinlture, in
language and in origin. It is, of course, a curious thought
that, had the trade winds not blown so persistently from the
south east, Australia could well have been, indeed almost
certainly would have been, a continent populated by Malays.
It nearly happened. There is much evidence of Javanese interest
in an abortive settlement in the north west of Australia.
We do not have a commonly shared colonial history. We
in Australia are a transplant. We are the descendants of the
colonial authority. In all too sad a sense we are the colonizers,
and my Government, Mr President, will strive mightily to right
the wrongs that have-been done to the original Australians. 3 
Of course, there is some recent history from 1945 on
which has contributed to our friendly relations. There are
national and neighbourly ties in security, in trade, and in
the contacts of proximity. Wc perceive that each of us is
really very important to the other. Others have come to the
area and have gone, or are going home. We are both going to
stay here. Our future is intertwined forever. And, for all
our differences, we share, I believe, tolerance, humour,
friendliness, reasonable modesty and an unshakeable belief
in the brightness of our destiny.
I believe that Australia and Indonesia and let it be
said, Papua New Guinea as well are necessarily involved in
one another's destinies. This has already been so. No countries
in the region have a firmer foundation of trust and co-operation
on which to build.
SAustralia was one of the first countries to support
Indonesia's struggle for independence in the postwar years.
The Australian Labor Party and the Australian trade union
movement actively encouraged your independence movement, both
bilaterally and in the international sphere. The United Nations,
through a Good Offices Committee on which Australia was the
Indonesian nominee, played a mediatory role in the peace
settlement which led eventually to the transfer of sovereignty tc
an Indonesian Government representing the Indonesian people.
That link is symbolised tonight by the nresence of the Honorable
Sir Richard Kirby, the President of our Conciliation and 
-4-
Arbitration Commission, who, as His Honour Judge Kirby, was the
Australian Representative on the Good Offices Committee, and
whose'affection and regard for your country has continued
undiminished. In the difficult days of confrontation there were
enough people of wisdom in both countries to keep up the bridges
of friendship. Today, Australia and Indonesia remain steadfast
supporters of the United Nations, of which Indonesia became
the 60th member in 1950 when her struggle for national independence
was won. I am sure it is an auspicious sign that Indonesia and
Australia will be working together in partnership especially
during the coming two years as members of the United Nations
Security Council. We welcome the great progress you have made since the
difficult days of 1965. We admire the efforts your country has
made to strengthen the security and Drosperity of our region.
Your concern for the welfare of the region has been shown by
your active suopport for ASEAN and your sponsorship of the Asian
Conference on Cambodia in 1970. We respect your free and active
foreign policy, and your reluctance to become involved in
obsolescent military alliances.
Cultural links, too, are of growing importance in the
relations between our countries. We are proud that Australian
universities are currently training more than 200 Indonesian
post-graduate students selected by your Government. I take
this opportunity to announce that Australia will contribute 
$ A200, OOO over five years to the UITE? C Fund for the Restoration
of the Temple of Borobudur.
I want now to explain to you the broad principles and
ideals that will sustain and guide my Government's international
relations. Let this be known to all:
With a new Government there will be a new emphasis
in Australian foreign policy of profound importance. I want
this nev! emn'hasis to be clear and unmistakable amonp, the nations
of our region, particularly here in Indonesia, where we attach
such importance to the warmth and cordiality of our relationship.
You may know that foreign nolicy decisions were among the very
first initiatives undertaken by our Government during its first
days of office. The aim of these decisions, as with all future
decisions, is to establish a re-nutation for Australia as a
natinn with an independent and distinctive foreign policy. We
want to be regarded as a friendly, tolerant and co-onerative
neighbour and at no time open to any suggestion of racism.
Let me be more snecific about Australia's intentions
in this region. We believe the oeaceful progress and development
of South-East Asia will-be more speedily achieved if the region
is insulated from great -power rivalries. We support the ASEAN
concept of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-
East Asia. While we support the concept and will encourage all
nations involved in our region to support it, we also acknowledge
our existing obligations to our friends.
We have declared our willingness, should Indonesia ./ 6 
-6-
so desire, to make arrangements with your Government and
equally with an independent Papua New Guinea to provide
assistance in the training of forces, and in technical facilities
and the supply of equipment. We seek no binding treaty or formal
alliance, merely an understanding based on mutual trust and
friendshipo. We will be charting a new course in our foreign
policy, with less emphasis on the kind of military pact that is
no longer relevant to the realities of the
The keystone of our foreign policy for the 70s will
be the search for regional co-operation. In this we look first
and foremost to our great neighbour and firm friend, Indonesia.
We will be discussing with Indonesia and all our friends in the
region the possibility of new forms of co-operation to complement
existing arrangements like A13EAN which we regard as a model of
regional co-operation. We see regional co-operation as offering
the best hope for peace and progress in our part of the globe.
Working together, in understanding and mutual trust, there is
much we can do to enhance the living standards of all our
neighbours and to mitigate the ancient scourges of poverty,
ignorance and disease.
This is our paramount task. We are impressed by what
your Government has already done, through its policies, and through
the national philosophy of Pancasila, to achieve progress for
your people and political and economic stability. We pledge our
continuing encouragement and support for a new form of regional
co-operation that will speed your progress and bring nearer the
fulfilment of your goals. 7 
-7-
The future peace and progress of South-East Asia will depend
largely on how quickly and successfully these goals are achieved.
This region, I believe, is entering a new and more
hopeful era. There are three principal reasons for my
optimism. The first is the ceasefire in Viet-Nam, which has
brought to an end 20 years of bloodshed, suffering and turmoil.
My second reason for optimism is in the Drogress which
Indonesia herself has made under your guidance, Mr President
to achieve peace and development, and to restore fully the
principles of-harmony and justice, democracy and freedom embodied
in your Constitution of 1945. A just and prosperous Indonesia is
an essential condition of a just and prosperous South-East Asia.
We in Australia have looked to you to set an example to our
neighbourhood of progress and social transformation. In this,
our expectations have not been disappointed. I am confident
that Indonesia's progressive development will continue.
The third reason for my optimism if T may be bold
enough to say is the election of a new Government in Australia
committed to close regional co-operation and determined in every
way to promote the peace and welfare of our neighbours, We hope
to gain increasing standing in the eyes of Indonesia and our
other friends as an independent, tolerant and helpful neighboulr.
There are still vast problems beforf us all, but also vast
opportunities. It is my earnest hope that, working together,
we can do much to advance the prosperity and happniness of all
our peoples. 



AF-A-S
NQ DATE
M/ 42. 22 Febr~ uary 1971
PRIfBMI r! rFi Arm2. m3mTw) Il A PA IAr. TANT
Fol~ lowing is the text of an addreos by the Prine Minister
and Minister for Foreign Afffair Mr kWhitlam, to the Dowan
Peri-. alciinn ) P,. kYat TRenxiblik Tndoncoia ( Ind-o7nc~ tia Parliament) in
O Jakarta today. The speech was delivered at about 1600 hours
Canberra time. I am ro-Loundly moved by th-e honnur yo) u ' have dlone me,
and through me, m-y Government and nation in inviting me to address
you. When a little over t.! o months . ao I became Prime
tirU'istpr, as leader of th-e majority party in the Australian
* Parliament, I placed a visit to Indones-: ia at tu e vnry ' he~ d of
my nriorities. I was highily gratified by -the warmth o. f President
Soeharto's invitation. I and those travelling with me members
of my family, my stiff, and my officials hnave been deeply
touched by hosnite-lity and pr-nerosity with, which we hnave all
been treated. This visit comes at a !-ime of great cl&gt; ange of grea. t
change in ry own nation and of great c'. arge in our region. I want
to em-ha! sise, h'-) wevf-r, at -the ouLtse-t, thnat my visit syrbolisec
continuity a5 well as change. 12 
. In June last year my prcdoceosor as Prime Minister of
Australia, the Rkt. Hon. William McMahon, visited Jakarta and
xrde, sed this ass-c-bl1y. On Petu. L~ i to Au~ siralia he ti h
pcople of Australia, as I shall tell them, of the friendship
which the -oeopole and rvirernment n. f T~ dnzahad extended to himi
and through him, to Australia. Mr Mc~ abon was able to report
that at the official level, his discussions had fuirther advanced
co-osoeratuiton betw; ceri our tk~ ro countric,,.
Tbere w~ kas and is no partioan kdisot iIn y utyo
this mratter. Thbe cr11a ngae o f G o vePr n ie n Iias iade no cl-ange in
Australia's desire for the closest co-operation with the Government
and people of Indonesia.
I know that that wish is shared by the Indonesian
Government and neople. Austra-li* an-Indone,,,' Iin friendship is a,
constant factor in a charging region and a changiLng w. orld.
The new Australian Government has macle many sigrificant
changes in Australia's international relations, It would have been
strange indeed had it Inot been so, for my Government was elected
by the people of Australia with a mandate for ch. n, or -,-an. PeS
at home and abroad. You will -ecall that m~ y T~ arty e Autralian
Labor Party had been out'of office for 23 years, InhAvi: ng lost
power before Indonesia finally won her great struggle for
independence. -I-
As an example of the changes that have taken place,
I cite the record of Australia's voting in the United Nations
General Assembly. In the 1971 General Assembly, Australia
voted against three resolutions on Southern Africa and three
others concerning the Indian Ocean, apartheid and selfdetermination
all of which Indonesia supoorted. But in the
1972 General Assembly, immediately after my Government took
office, Australia voted affirmatively with Indonesia on each
of those resolutions. On all important iissues of race,
decolonisation and self-determination, our voting now accords
with Indonesia's. On the day that I was sworn in as Prime Minister
of Australia I made this statement to our people, which sums
up the general approach of my Government. I said that I
wanted " An Australia which will enjoy a growing standing
as a distinctive, tolerant, co-operative and well
regarded nation not only in the Asian and Pacific
region, but in the world at large."
I will return later to the role of middle powers in
the world at large. Let me say something first about our
relations with our neighbours and our region. In the distant
past Australia tended to ignore South-East Asia. Generations
ago, we were still largely a European outpost, a part of the
old British Emnire, with our loyalties and nreoccupations in
Europe alone. In the oast 20 years we moved to an opposite
extreme. / 4 
Influenced by such events as the Chinese revolution
and the war in Indo-China, we became oreoccupied, even obsessed,
with South-East Asia as a new Australian frontier, even a frnntline
for our security. This led us into military involvements
and military pacts that are no longer relevant to the contemporary
needs of Australia or the region in which we live.
In the wake of a Vict-Nam settlement, it is my hope
that we will see South-East Asia in a calmer, more constructive
perspective. We -want our attitude to be based less on irrational
fears for our security, and directed more to peaceful political
initiatives for the welfare and nrogress of our neighbours.
My Government believes that it has a responsibility
to take a generous oart in any international effort for the
social and economic rehabilitation of Indo-China. There are
several reasons why such resnonsibility devolves on us.
Australia was one of the belligerents, although my
Government has withdrawn all its forces from Viet-Nam and ended
its military involvement. Over and above that, we are the
richest member of the community of nations in the South-East
Asian region, with a strong interest in the welfare of our
neig-bours. We believe that the problems that you and other
nations of the region face now are human and social problems,
nroblems that are common to all mankind. How best to raise
your stndards of living: how to bring literacy, cultural and 
educational opnortunities to your people: how to control the
growth of population and the environmental problems it will
bring in its wake as your cities become more industrialised:
how best to make use of the foreign aid resources at your
disoosal to overcome poverty and disease. It is in these
areas that my country is most anxious to help. We note the
measures you are now taking to achieve population control.
We would welcome, if your Government desires it, a long-term
study of the whole rnncept of foprain aid to determine how
best to apply it to urgent human and social needs. 2
Last month I visited N-w Zealand where a new Labor
Government has also been elected. The New Zealand Prime
Minister, Mr Kirk, and I expressed our intention of working with
our Asian and Pacific neighbours in making adjustments to
existing arrangements and. seeking new forms of co-operation.
We see great merit in an organisation genuinely representative
of the region, without ideological overtones, conceived as an
initiative to help free the region of the great power rivalries
which have bedevilled its progress for so long, and which would
be designed to insulate the region against ideological
interference from the great nowers. I must emnhasise that
such an objective is one which would take time and careful
consultation with all of our neighbours.
There is one very great change about to occur in
our region of very special imoortance and interest to Indonesi2.
and Australia equally. Indonesia and Australia at nre: e" t ./ 9 
a common border the border between Indonesia and Papua New
Guinea. Before long that will no longer be true. Indonesia
will share that border with an independent nation, the nation
of Papua New Guinea.
I have just visited Papua New Guinea to explain my
Government's plans to the Deople there. What I have tried to
put to them is that a decision about independence is not just
a decision on behalf of Papua New Guinea. It is also a decision
on behalf of Australia. It involves in a very real sense
S-Australia's vision of herself in the world. To put it nlainly,
Australia is not willing any longer to rule a colony.
We regard it as unacceptable that Australia, of all
countrie:, should be one of the world'-s last colonial powers.
It would be incredible if the Australian Labor Party, which, in
its last Government, wholeheartedly supported the cause of
Indonesian independence, were to accept willingly a colonial
D role for herself in the 1970s.
SIt is not only a question of our responsibilities to
the neople of Papua New Guinea, it is not only a question of
our clear responsibilities under the United Nations Charter,
it is a question of our responsibilities to ourselves.
We are determined that we shall be true to ourselves
and divest Australia of the colonial taint. This in no way
means that we are going to wash our hands of our responsibilities
towards the people of Panua New Guinea. We freely ana gladlY / 7 
accept that for many, many years to come, Papua New Guinea '. ill
need continuing and substantial assistnnce from Australia. She
shall have it and this again is a policy which would not be
changed even if there were a change i the Gover4; mcnt of Australia.
But our true role is as a friend and neighbour, not as a ruler.
I believe that Indonesia can also play a valuable part
as Papua New Guinea's friend and nearest neighbour. I hope the
Seopl. of Papua New Guinea will look to Indonesia as an example
of how neoples of different cultures and customs, of different
Slanguages, of different religions, at widely different stages
of deve. orment spread over a vast, divided and difficult terrain,
Scan come together, live together , nd grow together as one great
nation. If I might sum up the general lines that my Government
will follow, I should like to quote a brief nassame, I wrote
18 months ago when in Opnosition, for a book outlining for th,
0 Peoole of Australia, the lines a Labor Government, if they
elected one, would pursue. I wrote then:
" Essentially, a nation's foreign nolicy depends upon
a balance between commitment and Dower. Australia's first and I
fundamencal commitment is to. our own national security. This is
a commitment quite commensurate with our power and our re: source;.
Our second commitment is to a secure, united and friendly
Papua New Guinea. This too is well wit'in our nower. Our lack
of wisdom and foresight, rather than any lack of nower and influere,
is our real danger in this case. / 8 
Our third commitment is to achieving friendly relations 3
with our nearest and largest neighbour, Indonesia.
Our fourth commitment is more general, because in this
context our power becomes more generalised it is our commitment
to the peace and prosperity of the immediate region. Clearly
our ambitions and aspirations on this level run beyond our actual
power. Even so, we are far more influential than mere numbers
would suggest Our fifth commi tmient is to our own renutation: our
power in this case lies in our will, not our resources. This
taint of racism must be removed if w. e are to be a good neighbour
in our region." These are the five great pillars on which my Government
proposes to establish its international relations. But it is
not merely to ourselves, or even simply to our own region, that.
our ultimate commitment lies. Our ultimate interests lie in
helping to nreserve stable and peaceful relations between the
great powers. In military and industrial terms, Australia
and Indonesia can both perhaps be described as middle powers.
We have a common interest in seeing th.'. it stable balance is
maintained between the great nowers China, the Soviet Union,
Janan, the United States on whose decisions the peace of the
world will principally derend. As middle Dowers, we can both be
active in working for peace and understanding in the world at
large. It is in this broader context that I see the need for a
fresh and indenendent policy for Australia in international rel-"" 
It is in this context that I see great new opportunities for
co-operation with Indonesia.
Once more let me express my deep gratitude for the manner
in whici you and the Government and people of Indonesia have
received me. I am glad to have the opportunity so early in the
life of my Government to reaffirm the existing links between our
two countries and to forge new and stronger ones.
Living as we both do in a region which is in many ways
the world's most turbulent and economically deprived, we cannot
ignore the very great difficulties and complexities which lie
ahead, for us and for our neighbours. Yet, even so, it is
S impossible not to hold real hope for the future, even while
acknowledging the dangers.
There is a very real prospect that there will be no
major international conflict in our neighbourhood in the foreseeable
future. The region has seen 30 very dark and troubled years. It
would be naive to believe that we are now entering a period of
profound peace. But at least we may look forward to a period of
S comparative oeace uneasy, fragile, imperfect nerhaps, but if
we have the will and determination, it will be enough to allow us
to create the conditions in our rgiJon by which we can reduce the
scourges of ooverty, starvation and suffering. In that war a
war that is really worth waging I profoundly believe our two
great countries will cement a deep and enduring, an unbreakable
nartnership. 



EXTRACTS FROM A SPEECH AT THE TASMANIAN A. L. P.
CONFERENCE, DEVONPORT, TASMANIA.
4 MARCH 1973, BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
M. P.
LEADER OF THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY LABOR PARTY
1. Exactly six years ago 16 March 1967
I made my first address to an A. L. P. Conference as the
Party's leader, here at Devonport.
2. It was a critical time in thehistory and
fortunes of our Party. We had just emerged from our
worst defeat. There were people inside and outside the
Party who genuinely questioned whether the A. L. P. could
long endure.
3. I said then
It There are literally millions of
ordinary Australians who wish profoundly to see
a Labor Government in Canberra; there are
thousands who are willing to work actively to
secure that Government; there are hundreds
upon hundreds who want to give their time,
ideas, energy and money towards it. No
party is so rich in its potential resources.
It is our duty to encourage, develop and use
those human resources of energy and goodwill.
4. That was what I set out to do. My gratitude
is deep and my debt immense to all those who joined in
that great crusade for it was nothing less than that.
The role of Tasmania and the Tasmanian Branch
and my colleagues from Tasmania has been decisive.
a) First there is my personal and political
debt to Lance Barnard
b. The Tasmanian Branch was the first to
support my efforts to secure re-organisation
of the party structure, and Tasmania gave
unwavering support at every stage,
culminating in the great re-construction
in the two great mainland States. This was
the key to victory.
c) Eric Reece's smashing victory last April
set the pace of Labor's Aational march for
the rest of the year. From that time on,
we never looked back.
d) The magnificent Tasmanian performance in the
House of Representatives elections a clean
sweep clinched the victory. ./ 2 
I may say in passing that there is cold
comfort indeed for our opponents in their claim that
the swing to Labor was not so great after all. This
is true only in relation to the great gains we made
in 1969 17 seats with a massive swing of The
1972 election was in essence the last round in a
six-year battle, and our share of the 1972 vote after
preferences was in fact greater 52% as against 51%
than the Liberal-Country Party achieved under Menzies
in 1949.
6. We now look to a great future, for our
country, and for our Party. Hard as the past years may have
been, they have had one great advantage. We were able to
use those years preparing relevant and modern policies.
No Australian Government has come to office so well
equipped with men and measures for the great tasks ahead.
That is why we have been able to move so swiftly in the
first few weeks. We did not wake up to find ourselves in
office and then wondering " Well, what do we do now
We knew exactly what we wanted to do and exactly what the
people wanted us to do.
The Parliament which has just opened will be
the great Reform Parliament in Australian history. It has
a double task to clear away the backlog of the past
23 years and to build new machinery adequate for the needs
and hopes of Australians for the rest of this century and
beyond. 



EMBARGO 5.00PM SUNDAY 18 MARCH 1973:
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S ROLE IN EDUCATION
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE M. B. FLOOD SCIENCE BLOCK OF
ST. PATRICK'S COLLEGE,.. PROSPECT VALE, TASMANIA
SUNDAY 18 MARCH 1973
There has never been any qualification about
my Government s commitment to education. In my
policy speech last November I promised that education
would be the most rapidly growing sector of public
spending under a Labor Government. We see it as the
primary instrument for improving the quality of life
of our people and promoting equality of opportunity
for our children. Under previous Governments, education was
one of the most neglected fields. It was an area for
which Liberal Governments in the national Parliament
accepted little or no responsibility. Whatever
responsibility they accepted was grudging, tardy
and partial. Our responsibility will be wholehearted,
prompt and far-reaching. We are determined that
education will no longer be used as a weapon to
perpetuate privilege, inequality and division.
We are determined that every child who embarks on his
secondary education this year shall have the same opportunity
as any other child of completing that education and
advancing further. / 2 
-2-
Our approach to education has never been
based on elitist, regional, sectarian or other
discriminatory grounds. Our concern is for all
children in all schools, whether Government, Catholic
or otherwise independent. The debate in education
is no longer whether schools should receive assistance
from the National Government. That principle is
now accepted. It was established in 1964 when the
Liberal Government introduced its program of
Commonwealth assistance for science blocks, under
which this building was financed. It was
fully accepted by our opponents in May last year
when they announced some long-term but inadequate proposals
for assistance to secondary schools. So the question of
whether the National Government has a responsibility is
no longer an issue. The debate now is about the scale
and method of the national Government's involvement
whether it should be piecemeal or thorough, selective
or universal, arbitrary or planned, haphazard or co-ordinated.
Our preference is clear: It is for universality, for
planning, for co-ordination, and for generosity.
Our aim is to ensure that all schools receive assistance
according to their needs.
There can be nothing but praise for the efforts
of the poorer non-government schools, particularly
those in the Catholic system, to provide their children
with educational services of the highest standard.
This is no easy task. Within the Catholic system, this
college, of course, is one of the fortunate schools.
The Christian Brothers have set a noted example of
dedication and self-sacrifice in the cause of education.
I pay my own tribute to the Rev. Brother Michael Flood,
who gave 65 years of service to his Church as a Christian
Brother, whose memory is esteemed in Catholic education
circles throughout this country, and whose name is
commemorated by the building we open today. 
The educational system he served was
founded on the principle that parents have a right to choose
their children's education. But it is not enough to insist
that parents have a right to choose. So they should and do.
But the choice for all parents should be one between
systems and philosophies of education, not between
standards and opportunities. Too often under previous
Governments the only choice was that given to a wealthy or
privileged minority to choose a wealthier or more privileged
school. We can never be content with over-crowded,
under-staffed impoverished schools merely because a minority
have a right to opt out of them.
It is the Government's duty it is my Government's
determination to see that the right of choice carries with
it neither hardship for parents nor deprivation for children.
After all, the parents of Catholic children have suffered as
much as anyone from the old approach. The pupils of State
and Catholic schools I do not in this context include
St. Patrick's College have had less than half as good
a chance as the pupils of other independent schools to gain
Commonwealth secondary scholarships, and much less than half
as good a chance of completing their secondary education.
Throughout Australia only 4% of the pupils at
Government schools and 7% at Catholic schools qualify for
secondary scholarships. But 15% of the pupils at other
independent schools qualify for them. Only three out of
every 10 pupils at Government and Catholic schools reach
the final year of secondary education, whereas at other
non-government schools eight of every 10 reach the final
year. No democratic government can accept this disparity.
It is morally unjust, it is socially wasteful. To sell
our children short today is to sell Australia short tomorrow. / 4 
-4-
My Government has already begun to tackle the
problems of inequality in education. We will adopt the same
method to assist schools as previous Governments adopted to
assist universities and colleges of advanced education.
In December I wrote to a number of leading educationalists,
including representatives of the Catholic system, inviting
them to join an interim committee for a Schools Commission,
under the chairmanship of Professor Karmel, which would
examine and determine the needs of students in all schools.
In due course a permanent Australian Schools Commission
will be set up. Its reports will be published; its advice
will form the basis for my Government's assistance to
education. We will act quickly upon the recommendations of
the interim committee. In answer to a question in
Parliament last Tuesday,* I had this to say about the
progress of the interim committee's work:
" I have kept regularly in touch with
my colleague the Minister for Education
in regard to the deliberations of the
interim committee. I have met the Chairman,
Professor Karmel, on several occasions since it
was appointed. It is expected that the interim
committee's report will be made available as
requested before the end of May. This will
mean that it will be available in sufficient
time to be considered at the Premiers Conference
which should be held in June or maybe, if the
House gets up early enough, even in May. In
those circumstances the State Governments and the
non-government school authorities will have ample
opportunity to prepare for the 1974 scholastic
year in the light of the additional funds which
it is expected the Australian Government will
make available for schools." 
There is nothing unusual or even particularly
radical in a system based on priority of needs. It is
in fact rather simple and obvious. No company or enterprise
in the world would allocate its resources in any other way.
The Catholic education system itself determines its priorities
according to what it conceives to be the needs of its
children. Our aim is to avoid the old-fashioned system of
ad hoc decisions for special grants which took no account
of the long-term needs and planning requirements of the
beneficiaries of those grants. Everywhere in the old system
of grants one finds a pattern of disparity. If we look at
the breakdown of grants for science facilities approved in
1971 for the four years to June 1975 we find that some
States emphasise the needs of Government schools over
non-government schools, others give preference to nongovernment
over government schools. South Australia is
giving four times as much money under the science grants to
government schools as to non-government schools $ 2,647,125
against $ 663,525. Queensland is giving more money to nongovernment
schools $ 3,323,020 than to government schools,
who are to receive only $ 3,072,780. The science block
program, the grants for libraries, and system of per
capita grants approved by previous governments were
far from adequate responses to the real needs of our children.
They were not the solutions of a Government accepting
its responsibilities: they were in fact devices for
avoiding them. My Government has undertaken to continue in the
current year all grants to schools made under existing
Commonwealth legislation. I want to tell you now of the
Government's attitude to arrangements already entered into
with non-government schools for science facilities and
library programs. / 6 
The previous Government offered specific amounts
for individual science facilty projects for each year of the
present program to its conclusion on 30 June 1975.
These are firm commitments and will be honoured by my
Government. But the continuation of specific grants for
science laboratories in both government and non-government
schools after June 1975 will be a matter for the Schools
Commission or in the short term, the interim committee.
A similar approach will be followed for the
secondary schools libraries program. Specific offers
have been made by the previous Government for individual
projects up to 31 December 1974 when the present authority
will expire. My Government believes that these offers
represent commitments under the existing legislation and
they will be honoured. But after 1974 we will look to
the Schools Commission to make recommendations on whatever
library grants are appropriate.
We take the same view with general capital grants
for schools. On 12 December 1972 I assured the Premiers that
the $ 167 million appropriated under the State Grants Schools
Act 1972 for capital facilities in government schools would be
made available and that they could proceed with their programs.
I have given the Premiers a similar assurance that the $ 48
million appropriated for non-government schools will also
be available. But my Government agrees with Professor Karmel,
the Chairman of the interim committee, that from July 1974
the allocation of money remaining for the benefit of nongovernment
schools should be on the recommendation of the
Schools Commission or the Interim Committee.
We have also decided that Commonwealth per capita
grants to non-government schools for recurrent expenditure for
1973 will be paid at the rates already approved for 1973
that is, $ 62 per primary pupil and $ 104 per secondary pupil.
In December I wrote to Archbishop Carroll and to the National
Council of Independent Schools and told them of that decision.
After 1973 the interim committee will make recommendations for
recurrent grants for 1974/ 75 on the basis of needs and priorities.
In subsequent years such recommendations will be made by the
Statutory Schools Commission. / 7 
-7-
With these arrangements, we intend within the
lifetime of this Parliament, or sooner, to ensure that the
national Government~ s commitment to education is discharged
wholly on the basis of needs. I do not apologise for the
fact that the Government's emphasis is on meeting needs
where they demonstrably exist and on giving priority to
areas where the need is greatest. We are concerned with
inequalities; we are not concerned with the historical
sources of these inequalities. It is the child who
matters. For this reason we have announced programs of
assistance for isolated children and students at tertiary
education institutions who are in genuine need. For
this reason we have shown our concern for the education
of Aboriginal children. For the same reason again, we have
taken steps to increase the number of dental therapists and
social workers in training.
Again with our belief in equality of opportunity,
we have tackled the question of pre-school education. Our
approach is a simple one. We believe that pre-school education
with its many advantages should be considered a normal
part of the educational ladder, not an abnormal provision
for a percentage of our pre-school population. We want for
every Australian child the opportunity of a year of pre-school
trainiig. Thus we aim to make available to Australians a
basic educational service which has hitherto and with great
success been available to all children only in the Australian
Capital Territory. In this way my Government is doing more to help
secondary education than any previous government has done,
or any agency has recommended. In 1970 a nationwide survey
of the educational needs of government schools was conducted
by the Australian Education Council, consisting of State
Ministers for Education. It was at that time the only
comprehensive attempt to assess educational needs. My
Government welcomed it for that reason. It drew public
attention to alarming deficiencies. But there were weaknesses
in that survey, and some of its techniques were subject to
criticism. / 8 
-8-
It took no account of technical or pre-school education.
The investigation by the Interim Schools Committee, set
up by my Government, will be both more up-to-date and more
comprehensive. Since the 1970 survey was made, costs have
increased and the problems are more urgent. Many areas
of need were not considered at all by the 1970 survey.
By means of our proposed Technical Education Commission
and the Interim Pre-schools Committee already set up,
we will be examining fields which the needs survey did
not even touch. It did not consider the specific needs
of isolated, Aboriginal or handicapped children.
Our program does. It will go beyond anything attempted before.
In all its action, the new national Government has
shown its concern for all children irrespective of where they
live, whether they are in a state or an independent school, or
whether they are suffering from disadvantage. In this we
differ from our opponents. A good education, the best education,
is not something individuals must be forced to buy. It is
something the whole community must undertake to provide.
It is not the privilege of a few children but the right of all.
My Government will ensure that such a right is permanently
enshrined in Australian society. 



PRIME MINISTER
MINERALS AND THE FUTURE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
LAKESIDE HOTEL, CANBERRA, MONDAY 19 MARCH 1973
In the management of our mineral resources,
the mining industry and the national Government have a common
interest and a common responsibility. We are custodians of
much of the nation's natural wealth. We are custodians
of our country's soil and its physical riches. We have a
joint interest in ensuring that these resources are managed
in the interests of the whole nation, both for present and
future generations. Last December the Australian people
gave my Government a positive mandate to discharge this
responsibility in partnership with the mining industry and
its many associated enterprises. It is a duty we will not
shirk. No one can dispute the fact that in a
short time your industry has helped transform the face
of our nation. It has transformed our landscape; it has
transformed our balance of payments. It has brought
Australia immense benefits, immense wealth, immense
technological and industrial progress. While our gross
national product and the total value of our exports doubled
during the 19601s, the value of our mineral exports increased
eight-fold. Minerals accounted for 7% of the value of
our exports in the early sixties; they now account for
more than 20%. We have thus restored the position of the
gold rush days of 100 years ago, when gold and minerals,
accounting for 47 per cent of Australia's exports,
were our principal export commodity. For all practical
purposes Australia is now self-sufficient in major
minerals except crude oil and the prospects there
look increasingly bright. This story is one of the great
feats of modern exploration. It is due in large measure to
the vision and enterprise of the men in this room tonight. / 2 
-2-
But there are wider considerations that compel
the involvement of modern government in the mining industry.
Despite the size of our mineral reserves, it would be fallacious
and dangerous to regard them as inexhaustible. There are
limits, as other countries have already found. The notion
of unrestricted mining and exploitation is one we cannot accept.
We must be concerned at the effects of unbridled competition
on the stability of international trade. We must recognise
a growing concern in major industrialised countries at the
rapid depletion of traditional energy sources and their
increasing dependence on imports for their raw materials.
We must be concerned to see that our minerals are sold at
reasonable prices in world markets. We must be concerned
to see that our future energy needs and industrial
requirements are met. We must take account of the effect
of mining on the rights of our Aboriginal people, on the
environment and the control of pollution, problems
of undoubted significance for all mankind. We must ensure
the greatest possible measure of Australian ownership
and participation in the mining industry. The industry
is already 62% foreign owned. We do not want that figure
to go higher. In short, for all these reasons, we cannot
allow the future to take care of itself.
EXPORTS Accordingly, my Government is implementing
new policies. Our first step, as you know, has been to place
controls on all mineral exports, whether in raw or semi-processed
form. This, we believe, will ensure that exports are sold at
reasonable prices on the world market. Our measures will
encourage more processing of minerals in Australia, leading
to greater employment opportunities, greater industrial
self-sufficiency, and, not least, to a higher unit value
for our exports themselves. In the longer term, through
these controls, we can look to shipping economies for both
buyer and seller, by reducing the volume of low-value
materials being moved around the world. None of this
means that the Australian Government wishes to cut off
supplies of raw materials to valued business partners in
other countries. We shall do business, and we shall do it
with honour; but we do not regard the rape of our resources
as inevitable, and we certainly do not intend to lie back and
enjoy it. The basic objective of our new measures is to
obtain the best return for Australia consistent with the realities
of the market place and balanced mineral development. It would
be foolish in administering the controls to ignore the market
realities of an industry which has provided the main dynamic in
our balance of payments. But judicious use of the export
control powers will add to our foreign exchange earnings. 
-3-
My colleague, the Minister for minerals and
Energy, has already said that the Government's export control
powers will not be employed capriciously or vexatiously.
This is a unanimous attitude among members of the Cabinet.
We want to assure our trading partners that we are seeking
no more than a fair price in our mineral contracts with
them. It would be unreal to seek prices higher than the
market will bear when alternative sources of supply are usually
available. As the details of our policies are worked out in
the months ahead, we shall take every opportunity to explain
them in bilateral consultations and in international organisations
concerned with minerals trade. Indeed, I see great scope for
consultation between Governments on the problems of mineral
development and trade. We are particularly conscious of the problems
of Japan, our major market for minerals. Her vast industries
are especially dependent on imports for their energy needs and
raw materials. It is not, and I must insist on this, our
purpose to try to exploit that dependence. But we believe it
would be in the interests of both Japan and ourselves to work
together more closely to secure for Japan a more reliable
source of supply and to secure for Australian exporters more
reasonable prices. Ne~ ither of these aims is likely to be fully
achieved if trading arrangements are left almost entirely to private
commercial negotiation. Both will be achieved if our mutual'
interests our interdependence as trading partners are fully
recognised at both government and commercial levels.
The steps we have already taken will ensure that
the Government is kept fully aware of marketing arrangements covering
export prices and supply commitments. This is a prime purpose
of our export controls. We need to be satisfied that our mineral
export policies and practices are in the best interests of
Australia and our trading partners. It is perfectly clear that
large companies with interests crossing many national boundaries
may conduct their business in a way which, while maximising
returns for themselves, will be to the detriment of a particular
country. We will satisfy ourselves that those companies operate
in Australia in our interests as well as their own.
REVALUAT ION I know of your special concern with the effect
of recent currency fluctuations on your export contracts.
On this point I hope to reassure you. The effect of the
fluctuations, of course, is by no means uniform. Some currencies
have been appreciated, others depreciated, others remain at
their previous parities. As you know, companies with contracts
written in U. S. dollars, which include most iron ore contracts,
have suffered a reduction in their Australian dollar incomes. ./ 4 
-4-
But several factors tend to offset this loss. In many cases,
the immediate adverse effects on mining companies have been
avoided by taking out forward exchange cover. In addition,
the interest on and repayment of U. S. dollar borrowings
will cost less in Australian dollars. There should also be
increased shipments of minerals. For example, iron ore
exports from the Pilbara to Japan for 1973-74 are expected
to be substantially higher than in the current year. Other
mineral exporters are enjoying increases in the world prices
of their products, such as copper, zinc and lead. The
mining industry can expect its sales to increase as the
economies of customer countries expand.
The Minister for Minerals and Energy has said
that he expects appropriate relief to be given to exporters
through the re-negotiation of contracts written in American
dollars. In this he has the full support of the Government.
Needless to say, he has your support. For our part we will
be using our influence to see that suitable relief is
forthcoming. On 15 February Mr. Connor discussed this problem
with the Japanese Ambassador in Canberra. Mr. Connor pointed to
the need for early discussions between Japanese and Australian
businessmen. In a letter to Mr. Connor of 20 February, you,
Mr. Phillips, indicated that your council welcomed the
Government; s intervention to assist in renegotiation of contracts.
We shall use all our influence to see that suitable relief is
forthcoming. But I emphasise that any new negotiations would have*
little prospect of success if the Government were to indicate in
any way that it was considering compensation for mining companies
for the effect of recent currency changes.
For the future, it is certainly desirable that
contracts should be written in Australian dollars or provide
for stability ofreturns in terms of Australian dollars.
With long term contracts, built-in safeguards will be needed
to cope with currency changes and variations in demand. That
should be the aim. Mining companies must keep it in mind.
It is regrettable that this simple precaution was not observed
with many contracts already written, tome which still have
many years to run. It is also fair to remind you that some of
your industry's financial problems stem from individual negotiations
a few years ago with group buyers. I hope our new control
mechanism will work to prevent individual suppliers being picked off,
one by one, by overseas cartels.
While we want fair prices for our minerals, we
recognise that fixing appropriate export prices will need to be
handled with care. In some cases there is no single, readily
ascertainable price which can be regarded as a world price.
Quality differences and locations need to be considered. There
will also be times when it will be in the producer ' s and the
nation's interest to permit sales at low prices, perhaps as low
as the cost of production provided the nation and the producer
can earn a satisfactory profit at the lower price. This may be
necessary when we are trying to break into new markets. We know
that in many instances mining companies operate in a buyer's
market, and too rigid an application of controls could result in
contracts being lost to other countries. 
PROCESSING I have said that my Government wants more
processing of our minerals. It is the policy of my party
and my Government " to encourage the treatment and fabrication
of mineral resources in Australia." At every stage of
processing, the value of these resources is greatly increased.
Your council has indicated that it supports more local
processing, but that companies should not have to undertake
further processing if it would be uneconomic to do so.
This is a reasonable approach. Local processing places
a heavy demand on capital and other resources. Before
requiring a company to process in Australia, we will ensure
that markets are available for the processed product. The
State Governments, through the control they exercise over
mining and exploration leases, generally require mining
companies to undertake feasibility studies to determine
whether processing is economic. My Government supports
that requirement.
ABORIGINES High among my Government's ambitions is to
give natural rights to our Aboriginal people. We are determined
that their interests will be preserved in any mining operations.
Until the mid-1950s no mining in Aboriginal reserves in the
Northern Territory was permitted. Then it was decided to allow
prospecting and mining in the reserves, but to pay royalties
on minerals to an Aboriginal Benefits Trust Fund. The decision
to pay royalties into a fund for Aboriginal use was a somewhat
oblique acknowledgement of Aboriginal rights in the land.
The Crown, however, continued to collect royalties in the
first instance and to control prospecting and mining.
There are now two major mining operations in
the Arnhem Land reserve and another, of course, in what was once
part of the Aboriginal reserves on Cape York in Queensland.
All three developments are close to Aboriginal communities.
It would be difficult to draw up any social balance sheet of
gains and losses of these Aboriginal communities. The indications
are that none of the communities would wish to turn the clock back.
It is certain, however, that they face critical problems in
adjusting to the new situations, and that the benefits to the
Aboriginals in terms of employment and training, which had been
hoped for at the outset in the mid-50s, have not always been achieved.
The Government has announced its intention to
grant to the Aborigines title in the land in the Northern Territory
reserves. Mr. Justice E. A. Woodward's commission is to advise on
ways of implementing this policy. To avoid further complication of
an already complex situation, the Government imposed a " freeze"
on the issue of exploration licences and mining leases and of
leases of land. This action, we know will create problems for the
companies concerned. The Mining Industry Council has urged that
the rights of those companies committed to exploration programs in
the reserves should be renewed. These cases are being examined, as
are the needs of operating companies, which need additional mining
and land leases. Your council has also argued against any
abdication of Government responsibility for, and control over,
mineral resources. Decisions on this aspect of the land rights 
issue will be taken only after the Government has had an
opportunity to consider the report of Mr. Justice Woodward's
Commission. The Commission hopes to report within a few
months. The Mining Industry Council's submission will be
carefully considered.
ENVIRONMENT We must be equally concerned with the effect
of mining on the total environment. Last month the Australian
Government endorsed a policy of impact statement procedures
to ensure that the environmental effects of any proposal are
taken into account at all stages of decision making. Impact
statements will be required where a proposal has significant
environmental consequences, where Commonwealth funds are
involved, or where Commonwealth constitutional power is
involved. From January 1974 there will be public hearings
before an impact statement is prepared.
At this point, allow me to quote the words
of H. R. H. The Duke of Edinburgh, who is now visiting Australia
as chairman of the Australian Conservation Foundation.
Writing on 18 September 1972 he said:
" It might well be supposed that the
conservation of nature and natural resources
is something quite new in man's experience whereas,
in fact, every civilisation in history which did not
take active steps to control its growth had to suffer
the exhaustion of raw materials or food, or both,
and collapsed. The only difference today is that
our civilisation has come to rely on a different
set of the earth's resources which, until the
development of industrial processes, had remained
untapped. Technology has raised human standards
of existence to heights beyond the imagination of
previous civilisations, but it has also made it possible
for astronomical numbers of people to inhabit the earth.
" The problem is two-fold. Unchecked exponential
growth in population numbers, coupled with exponential
growth in the use of non-renewable mineral resources,
is an extremely serious threat to the standards
and very existence of our present civilisation.
The threat is most serious to those enjoying
the highest standards.
" At the same time, the proliferation of the
human population, the exploitation of natural resources
and the constant increase in the demand for more
food-growing land constitute an even more deadly threat
to the continued existence of the natural and wild
environment as we know it today." / 17 
These are among the reasons for my
Government's involvement in the mining industry.
The same concern is shared by Governments throughout
the world. It is not our intention to bring to an end
the truly magnificent achievements of the past decade
or so. Rather it is our firm intention to help your
industry, not hamper it; to encourage trade,
not frustrate it. But we must look to the broadest
long-term interests of our country. Your industry,
I know, will benefit from my Government's
participation. The one thing you can be sure of is that
the free-wheeling approach of the previous Government
is gone forever. We have much to share and much to gain
in our trade with the rest of the world. But it must
be clear that, in regard to minerals, Australia
henceforth intends to be the mistress of her own
household. CANBERRA 19 MARCH 1973 



EMBARGO: 4. OOPM FRIDAY 23 MARCH 1973 6 1./
4 &gt; A U S RL A&amp;
PRIME MINISTER
THE PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE,
ANN STREET, BRISBANE, FRIDAY 23 MARCH 1973
This is my first visit to Queensland since
my Government took office. It is a happy occasion for me.
It has also provided me with my first opportunity as
Prime Minister to talk to the Queensland Premier and his
Ministers. This, too, has been personally gratifying.
Our talks have been no less cordial for being overdue, and
I thank Mr. Bjelke-Petersen for his invitation to meet him.
I trust that no one will detect any sinister symbolism in the
fact that my first official duty here is to open new offices
for the national Government. This splendid building should
be regarded in no sense as a foreign mission. Contrary to what
some people are saying, Queensland is still part of Australia.
My Government's interests and Australia's interests are one and
indissoluble, and for my part we are determined to work together
to advance them. My Government's commitment to the welfare and
progress of Queensland is both general and specific. It is
based on two great themes. There is first our general commitment
to the cities. In Queensland 60 per cent of the people live in
Brisbane and its suburbs. It is in these areas that my
Government's attack on the problems of land and housing costs,
schools opportunities, hospitals, public transport, unemployment,
migrant welfare and access to community resources for recreation,
sport and culture are principally directed. We have already
established a Department of Urban and Regional Development to
co-ordinate our work of rebuilding and regenerating our cities.
Queensland will share in that process. The related task of
bringing new standards of social welfare to the people a
fundamental theme of all Labor governments has been entrusted
to our new Department of Social Security. I remind you that
this Department is headed by a Queenslander, my colleague
Bill Hayden. / 2 
-2-
The second part of my Government's commitment to
Queensland is a specific one. It is in our policies for
northern development. That Department is also headed by a
Queensland Minister, Dr. Rex Patterson. It is our aim, in
co-operation with the Government of Queensland, to develop
the vast and valuable resources of northern Australia for
the benefit of the Australian people. It is in the north
that the great sugar and cattle industries and much of our
mineral industries have been established. It is in the north
that Australians face their greatest challenge in retaining
the ownership of the nation's resources and developing new
industries under Australian control.
My Government has made one other specific pledge
to the Queensland people. We have undertaken that one of our
two main initiatives in regional development will be concentrated
in Townsville. I said last year in my policy speech that the
national Government was already responsible for decisions which
have determined the growth and the burdens of Townsville
more than any other Australian city except Canberra itself.
What is being done for Albury-Wodonga in the southern States
can be done for Townsville and other centres in Queensland.
Albury-Wodonga is one of the best examples to
date of what fruitful collaboration between the States and the
new national Government can achieve. It is the sort of
co-operation we must foster and preserve. My meeting with
Mr. Hamer and Sir Robert Askin on 25 January was the first time
the Governments of the two oldest States had come together-with
the Commonwealth to plan the development of a new city.
I trust that with similar co-operation in Queensland the
prospects for the future growth and prosperity of Townsville
will be as bright as those for Albury-Wodonga.
As one instance of my Government's determination
to give greater importance and prestige to Townsville, we have
undertaken that Townsville will be made an international airport.
Townsville, the gateway to the Barrier Reef, is vital to our
developing tourist industry. It is vital to Australia as a whole.
There has been one other notable example since my
Government took office of what co-operation between the States
and the national Government can achieve in the interests of all.
Early this month, I met the Premiers of New South Wales, South
Australia and Victoria to discuss the future use of the waters
of the River Murray. This meeting was called on the initiative of
one of the States South Australia. Its results will be
largely to the benefit of that State. I believe the measures
which will flow from that meeting will improve the quantity and
quality ' of the waters of the Murray available to South Australia.
I am proud that my Government, through its participation in that
meeting, will help bring these benefits to that State, and I hope
that through similar co-operative ventures we will bring similar
benefits to the people of Queensland. / 3 
-3-
Since My Government took office I have made
numerous offers to the State Governments, including Queensland,
to assist them with local and regional problems common to all
of us. One of these was an attempt to control the soaring prices
of land and housing, which are denying a decent home to thousands
of Australian families. My Government proposes to set up Land
Development Commissions to acquire and make available residential
land on reasonable terms. I have Vritten . to all the Premiers
proposifigi action on these lines.
I have also written to the Premiers offering-special
grants to overcome the backlog in sewerage services in the principal
cities. I have written to them outlining the terms of my Government's
offer to take over the uneconomic State railway services which im~ pose
crippling financial burdens on all State Governments. My Government
has offered the States additional funds totalling $ 52 million for
unemployment relief works of which Queensland's share was
$ 5.6 million. We have approved for Queensland an extra $ 5,124,000
from the $ 27.5 million increase in the borrowing program for the
States' local and semi-governmental authorities.
Our most recent action was my Cabinet's decision this
week to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act to allow us to
make special grants to the States for local government. This is
in line with our policy of allowing local Government full participation
in, and access to, the fund-raising processes of this country.
I am confident that in all these initiatives we will
receive the ready co-operation of the States. I am confident that
the people will not be side-tracked and hood-winked by specious
slogans about centralism and States rights. What our opponents
like to call centralism is the overdue recognition by the national
Government of-its responsibilities in areas which that Government
alone can discharge. our responsibility is t6 ensure Viable
and efficient local government. Local government in this city
happens to be the most efficient and progressive system of local
government in Australia.
I It is efficient and progressive because it is
organised on broad regional lines. It is, if you like, the most
distinctive example of centralism in Australia. Similarly, when
we talk of States rights, let us remember that the rights of people
are more important that tne rights of Governments. My Government
emphasises people's rights their rights to a decent home, to a
modern transport service, to a full education, to a pleasing and
unpolluted neighbourhood, to an equal share in life's opportunities
for recreation, leisure and cultural fulfilment. These are the
rights we hold paramount.
I pay tribute to all those who planned and built
this new Government centre. It will provide a link between
Governments and people. I hope it will be seen as a symbol of the
co-operative spirit that must prevail between Queensland and the
Australian Government. The true progress of our people depends on this
co-operation. There is much that our Governments can do alone; there
is much more they can do together. The greatest enemy of progress,
development and efficiency in our country has been the old-fashioned,
discredited rivalry that has prevailed between States and between
centres within the States. Queensland in many ways is the State
which has best managed to suppress these rivalries. It is in many
ways the proudest and most individualistic of States. Despite its
enormous size it has a unique cohesion and corporate pride. 
-4-
It is of all States the least urbanised, the
most decentralised, the most diverse in its climatic conditions
and natural resources. I make this earnest appeal to you all:
Let us work together in co-operation and good will for a
greater and more prosperous Queensland in a greater and more
prosperous Australia. It will be a tragedy for the Queensland people
if local jealousy, parochial sentiment and intolerant suspicion
are allowed to stand in the way of Queensland's progress.
I offer a lasting contract of mutual goodwill and shared
purpose between our Governments. Our ultimate interests
are the same, and I am sure that our common aims will be
approved by the people of your great State and by your
fellow Australians.
23 MARCH 1973 



ORATION BY THE PRIM~ E MINISTER AT THE HAND) ING OVER TO
THE BATHUJRST CITY COUNCIL OF THE COTTAGE OF J. B. CHIFLEY,
BATHURST 24 MARCH 1973
It is a profound measure of weight and force of Ben Chifley's
personality that of the 14 Australian Prime Ministers now dead, he is
outstandingly the one whose memory is clearest and strongest in the
hearts and minds of his countrymen. The Chifley legend I use the
word in its nobler sense has a force and meaning, even for the
new generation which never knew him. Each of us will have our own
opinion about who was the greatest of Australian Prime Ministers. I
venture to suggest, however, that there would be no dispute as to who
was the best loved.
One of the sources of Chifley's ability to inspire affection
was the simplicity of his life style. This cottage his only real
home in or out of office symbolised it. That is not to say that
Chifley was a simple man. He had inner reserves and an outer reserve
which sprang from a character of great complexity. There was a very
private Chifley unknown to the public, known perhaps not entirely
even to his closest colleagues. For all his great warmth, for all
his easy fellowship, for all the loyalty and love his inspires, he
was in fact never " one of the boys". In this sense there was another
Chifley apart, above, even dare one say it aloof.
So great is the hold of the Chifley memory on the Australian
Labor Party that it is usually forgotten how untypical of Labor leaders
he actually was; paradoxically he has become the archetype for our
leadership. There is something naturally very appealing to the Party
in the rise of an engine driver to Prime Minister; yreat of the 11 of
us who have led the Parliamentary Labor Party, only he and Matthew
Charlton fit the classic type. So in this, as in so many other ways,
Chifley was in a class of his own.
It is a great thing for us all to be here at Ben Chifley's
home not just this cottage but in this city which was so very much
his city. It is a very moving thing for me to be here as the first
Labor Prime Minister of Australia since Chifley. For us allt for the
Australian Labor Party, Bathurst holds a very special meaning at his
birthplace, his only real home; among the people who shared with him
the bitterness and frustrations of the thirties, the victories and
achievements of the forties. He was a Bathurst man through and through.
He used to say " No Chifley ever left Bathurst except feet first".
He did leave Bathurst to give on the national scale the same service
that he had, for so many years, given Bathurst in local affairs,
But it was to this city and the people of this city that he always
returned and did return to his last rest.
It is saddening to find that after 22 years his grave has
fallen into disrepair. When we looked into the matter we found there
was no machinery available to fulfil what is clearly a national
responsibility and should be a national charge, so I have decided that
henceforth the Australian Government shall assume responsibility for
maintaining the graves of all former Prime Ministers and I have asked my
colleague Don Willesee, the Special Minister of State, to make the
necessary arrangements. It is fitting that monuments and memorials of our great should
be preserved and cared for. We are not so rich in the memorabilia of
history that we can afford to allow them to be lost or neglected. I
congratulate all those who have worked for the preservation of this
cottage. Nonetheless, Chifleyts lasting memorial lies in what he
achieved for his nation and he himself has his true resting place in the
hearts of his countrymen. Those monuments are imperishable; that place
cannot be moved. 



SUNDAY, 25 MARCH 1973
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE VICTORIAN GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE ALP, ST. KILDA TOWN HALL
This is the first General Assembly of the Victorian
Branch since the . House of Representatives elections. It's the
first time I've spoken in this St. Kilda Town Hall since the
great rally winding up the campaign for those elections.
That meeting, the biggest and most enthusiastic political
meeting I've ever attended is now part of Australian history.
Among other things, that meeting symbolised the coming together
of all the elements which now make Victoria a truly great branch
of the Australian Labor Party. We won the elections federally
because we won in Victoria and particularly in the capital of
Victoria and we won in Victoria because the people of Victoria
believed that the reconstruction in 1970 was a genuine
remaking and remoulding of the Branch. That belief was not
misplaced. I'm told by the Press that there's to be a
confrontation today. The only confrontation that my Government
is involved in in Victoria is not in the St. Kilda Town Hall
but further up St. Kilda Road.
In this room are represented all viewpoints of the Party
any member of the Party who wanted to attend can come here today.
Your time and efforts ' created the first Labor Government
federally for 23 years. It's with your help that I'm now
Prime Minister of Australia. I come here to co-operate
not to confront you. I come here to thank you not to
challenge you. You can all be proud of what you have done
to create it. The Australian Government is your Government.
You helped to make it. I come to thank you and to work with you.
I think it's now quite clear what a Labor Government is all
about and I think that the work of this Government has helped
make clear what the reconstruction was all about. The point
at issue in the years before 1970 was whether the aims of
our Party could be achieved through Parliament and whether a
change in the Government party would mean a real change in the
direction of Australian society. The reconstruction was carried
through in the belief that a party which wished to win the
support of half the people of Australia should itself be
representative of the views of at least half the people of
Australia. We believed that such a party would be able to use
Parliament and the Parliamentary system to affect great and
real changes in the nation. We offered a chance to change.
The people took up our offer. We are making the most of the
opportunity they gave us. We have to acknowledge that
significant sections of our people had come to despair of the
Parliamentary system. If we hadn't won on 2 December the
effective survival of the system wouldn't have been able to
get much of an insurance policy. 
I believe that what we've done in the last three months
and even more what we are going to do in the next three years
and the next three Parliaments, not only restores Parliament
to its proper role as the effective instrument for economic,
social and political change, but will prove that, if used
properly, Parliament is the real instrument the only
instrument for achieving democratic socialism in our time.
Make no mistake about what we've been doing for the last
three months. The Governor-General himself said in his speech
opening the Parliament, our program is designed to achieve
basic changes in the administration and structure of
Australian society in the lifetime of this Parliament. We are
well on the way towards achieving this. We are determined to
affect our reforms in such a way that our reactionary opponents
will not be able to dismantle what we have created should they
ever again be given the opportunity.
And let me say this in passing about our opponents:
take no comfort at all in the fact that Mr Snedden or Mr Lynch
eminent Victorians as they may be have proved so ineffective.
The real result of their default is that the dominant voice
on the right is the voice of reaction. The Liberal Party is
moving under the control of men who speak the doctrine of
fear and hatred. The voice of the Liberal Parliament which
you now hear the Liberal Party which you now hear in the
Federal Parliament and outside is the echo of the early fifties.
These men haven't been chastened by defeat. They have merely
been further embittered by it. That is, they are a party bent
not on reform but on revenge, and it's our job to see that
they never get that opportunity.
It will be our fault if they get that chance to take
revenge to put the clock back, to dismantle the new structure.
I think it's fair to say that no government in Australia's
history has moved so rapidly and successfully to implement
the program for which it was elected. I have to confess that
when we were compiling the policy speech we anticipated that
it would take much longer to achieve substantial retention of
our promises. Yet setting aside for the moment the great
continuing matters the matters on which it will never be
possible to say we've done enough -' things like schools or
hospitals or cities setting them aside, we've already
implemented or set in train 70 per cent of the specific
promises in our policy speech. The real meaning of this,
the significance of our Party's future and Australia's
future is that by acting so competently we are freeing
ourselves we are preparing ourselves to take the political
debate in Australia to a new and yet even higher level. We
will be able to do this much sooner than we expected in
December. In 1975 we'll not just be standing on our record,
though that record will, I believe, be a very proud one.
We'll be seeking the people's support for a new program,
a new mandate on new issues that will take this nation to a
new and higher level of progress and progress and government. 
It amazes me that people at home even some people
abroad have expressed surprise at the speed with which
we moved. Did anyone believe that we wouldn't do what we've
been saying we'd do for years and years. I'd suppose it's really
an illustration of how our opponents in their 23 years
debauched the standards of Parliamentary politics and the
standing of politicians. People had ceased to believe that
politicians could be trusted to keep their word. I remember
before the campaign that the draft resisters gave us only
grudging support. They gave it to us not on the grounds that
we were committed to the abolition of conscription but on the
grounds that we might be more susceptible to pressure than our
opponents. The first act of my first Government the
duumvirate with Barcnard and Hasluck. The first act was
to end the draft, to end national service prosecutions, to
free everybody imprisoned under the Act. Should anybody have
been surprised. We promised to do it. It was something we could
do by administrative action and we did it in the very first week.
Should anybody have been surprised that we immediately withdrew
the vestigial military force, the advisers which had been
left in Vietnam, that we cut off all military aid to South
Vietnam. Admittedly that took longer. It took place in the
second week. But we promised to do it. It could be done by
administrative action and we did it. Could anybody have been
surprised that, in the third week, before Christmas, we had
secured the recognition of the People's Republic of China
and the exchange of diplomatic representatives with them.
We promised to do it. It took over two weeks to do that.
We had to negotiate with another country, but we did it.
We successfully negotiated with them.
Could anybody have been surprised that when America
resumed the bombing of Hanoi, we protested. We did immediately.
Should anybody have been surprised that when the ceasef ire
took place we immediately set in train and in a week secured
the recognition and exchange of diplomatic representatives
with North Vietnam? Now all these things, ladies and gentlemen,
were things which could be done by administrative action or by
negotiation with other countries. We did them all. Nobody
could have done them more effectively, more promptly.
All these things were things for which we sought a mandate,
for which we secured a mandate, on which we discharged the
mandate. Now I suppose this is an appropriate point for me
to bring in some other matters of Foreign Affairs. You might
have read about them.' I noticed in the agenda, that it is
supposed that we say that we should get rid of all U. S. bases
from Australia. We will carry out the mandate for which we
were elected, for which we sought the mandate.
And you will remember that the general context of
a great number of suggestions are made that we are wanting to
break the alliance with the that we are wanting to get
out of ANZUS, and anything that anybody in the Party says
which might have that effect is certain to have the maximum
publicity. But that's not what the Platform says. It's not what
the policy said. It's not what the mandate sought. Because
what the Platform says is: the Labor Party seeks close
continuing co-operation with the people of the United States
and New Zealand to make the ANZUS Treaty an instrument for
justice and peace and political, social and economic
advancement in the Pacific area. And in the policy speech 
as in every other respect I've followed it word for word:
the close and continuing co-operation with the people of
the United States and New Zealand to make it an instrument for
justice and peace and for political, social and economic
advancement in the Pacific. That's what the policy speech
said. It's what it had to say because it was in the Platform,
and that's what we want to make ANZUS. We want to make it
what the Platform says it should be. We want to make it
what the policy speech repeated that it should be. We want
to make it what we sought a mandate to achieve. We want
to make it what we were given a mandate to achieve.
Now let me point out that there are five bases
facilities ( that's a more appropriate term in most cases)
which have some defence significance which the U. S. has
arranged to have here. With two of them there has been a
great deal of mystery for a long, long time. One has been
at Alice Springs. It was to look at disturbances in the
atmosphere and attendant phenomena. We revealed to the
people and the Parliament that it was to detect nuclear
explosions in the atmosphere. It's because it's able to
do that that the U. S. felt confident to enter into the
treaty with the Soviet Union and Britain to ban nuclear
explosions in the atmosphere the treaty which China and
France will not sign. The other one was at Amberley
Air Force Base near Ipswich and it was to disturb tremors
in the underground and of course to distinguish earthquakes from
nuclear explsions underground. We are able to reveal that that's
what it did and it's because it's able to do that that the
United States is confidently working towards a comprehensive
nuclear treaty to ban it all. Now, nobody now would say that
these were not valuable. They were valuable. We ought to be
supporting it. And we have promptly ratified every nuclear
treaty which has ever been made. Our opponents had to drag
the chain. We had the conflict. But about those two things,
nobody could learn. They now know what they were for, and
nobody would object to them. They've helped to remove the
spectre of nuclear war from the face of the earth and they
could be effectively done from our part of the hemisphere.
Now the next two things are secret. One is at Pine Gap
near Alice Springs, one is at Nurunga near Woomera. I
emphasise that they are not part of weapons systems. They
can not be used to make war on any country, and the Ministers
whose job it is Foreign Affairs, Defence, Barnard, myself,
Willesee and Bishop all have verified that fact. We know
what goes on there. It's not our secret. One goes till
1976, one goes till 1979. They are expressed in the ANZUS
context. I repeat they are not part of weapons systems.
They can not be used to make war on any country. We can not
disclose any more about their purposes because they're not
our secrets. But ladies and gentlemen, what we want to
recognise is this: that if we seek to govern this country,
the people are entitled to believe that we will do it
responsibly. 
We never told the people at the elections that we
would disclose other countries' secrets if we knew them.
We never told the people that we'd break agreements that
went into 1976 or 1979 and we knew this. These were public
documents. Anybody can get copies of the Treaty.
Now you can't now say to people that you'll break
them. We didn't seek a mandate on that. But I urge you if you
want to know more about these, read what Barnard has said after
the discussion in Cabinet and Caucus. Don't go on subsequent
glosses about it. Read what was said. What the Cabinet and
Caucus heard. Then there's a final one, and that's the North West
Cape. Because Australia and the United States entered into
correspondence which said that the Australian Government
had no right to know the messages that went through, we
don't know.* We are determined to find out. The agreement
goes to 1988. But Barnard has said on behalf of the Cabinet
and the Caucus in the Parliament that he will make it this
year we would be negotiating that. We would never have
kept the silly secrecy that there was about the original
thing in Alice Springs the nuclear atmospheric one, or the
silly secrecy about the Amberley one the nuclear underground.
You now know. I can assure you that when in due course it's
regarded as proper to release the information as to what is
done at Pine Gap and Nurunga, you will find it just as acceptable
as you now find what's been done at the old one at Alice Springs
or at Amberley. Then you say that helps to see that the great
powers don't have this ignorance of suspicion of each other which
leads to wars. Because the wars that have taken place this
century have been due to the ignorance of rival powers upon each
other's doing. It's been due to the over-reaction of what great
powers have committed themselves to in ignorance and suspicion
of their rivals. These ones there will allay the suspicion
and remove the ignorance.
The North West Cape is unsatisfactory. No self-respecting
Government should ever have entered into it. No Government in
the world would now enter into such an arrangement. And it's only
fair to give us the opportunity when the Parliament gets up to
negotiate with the Americans to do a proper contemporary thing.
But believe me, we are determined to see in the terms of the
Party Platform that Australia will not be party into undertaking
or entering upon a war without knowing what it's all about and
how it's being done.
We have said through the conferences in the past that
members of Parliament in Australia should have just as much
right to see these things a's United States congressmen and that
has already been conceded it has been agreed there's no
difficulty about that. We achieved that promptly by putting
our cards on the table and it was seen to be reasonable.
Now don't blame the yanks for everything you don't like in this
country. It's not their fault that go many of our companies
and cattle stations are being bought overseas by them. It's
the fault of our predecessors. Don't blame the Republicans
and the Democrats for what the Liberals did. 
Now I'll hurry on to some of the other things here.
If things are capable of being done by Federal administrative
action we've already acted because already there's been a very
great deal done to transform the social security systems of
Australia. We already, before Christmas, set up the Interim
Schools Commission which will make its report before the end
of may which will, we expect, be put into force in; tie coming
bcudget and which, with the co-operation of the States, to which
we've written, will mean that the Commonwealth can take over
in the terms of the Party Platform, in the terms of the policy
speech, in the terms of Sir Paul's opening address to the
Parliament, will enable the Commonwealth to assume the
responsibility for planning and financing tertiary education
in Australia on the condition that the money so saved is spent
on other forms of education. It can all be done this year.
As far as we are concerned the report from the Committee which
I set up when I was Minister for Education in the thirteen
days before Christmas will be received before the end of May,
and with the co-operation of the States it will all be fully
implemented in the next scholastic year.
Some of these things involve legislation. It takes a
bit longer to get legislation but we are resolved to see that
our legislation will be in the terms of the mandate we sought
and which we got. Then the remaining thing is of course the
things which have to be done by co-operation with the States.
Things where the Commonwealth can't do it single-handed.
Admittedly, where international affairs are concerned the
Australian Government the national Government is the only
one which has any standing at all. Nobody could have acted
more promptly and fully than we did then. And when there are
administrative things, such as discharging prisoners or
discontinuing prosecutions or entering the draft, we did them
promptly immediately. We've already brought in the first
three weeks of this new Parliament more bills than any Government
has ever brought in federally in such a period all within the
terms of our mandate. We believe they should go through the
Parliament. If any of them are stalled, there's no question
what the public response will be when we put them to the people
at the Senate elections whether or not that is the whole of
the Senate or whether it is jointly with another House of
Representatives election.
You in this State have the great opportunity within the
next couple of months to have a State election and there are so
many things that we can only do by co-operation with the States.
If you want to do anything about the use and the cost of land,
if you want to do anything about public transport, if you want
to do anything about the environment, or the national estate
in general, the federal people can't do it single'handed.
The State people can't do it single'handed. We don't have,
federally, many of the constitutional powers, State governments
don't have financially many of the necessary powers, but between
us we could do any of these things. Now your great opportunity
in a couple of months is to elect a State Labor Government
again. 
I've known Clyde Holding for many years. I've worked
with him constantly. There's never a week goes by but we are
in touch with each other and I can assure you that if you want
an effective administration of this nation, of this city,
the only certain way to get it is to have a federal Government
and a State Government which without any inhibitions will
carry out a joint program. Governments, Federal and State,
which are both committed to the Platform of the Australian
Labor Party. I didn't seek a mandate on anything which is
not there. We got a mandate for things that are in there.
I know we will not seek a mandate for anything which isn't
in there, and it will all be in there, the lot of it will be
in his program, between us without division, we will co-operate
in seeing that this Platform is fulfilled. That's where we seek
a mandate. That's the mandate we can expect to get. Now,
the public, in the Victorian elections, will vote for Labor
candidates if they believe that the Labor Party will discharge
the mandate it seeks promptly and fully and that the Party
will back it. Now we've carried out the mandate that we
sought federally. I believe we are entitled to get the
support of this great assembly, the most representative gathering
of any political party in any State in Australia, and I believe
if we get that backing for the mandate we sought and got and
are discharging, that is the best hope of seeing that you have
success in the Mtate elections. The Party backs its Government.
That Government discharges its mandate.
Ladies and gentlemen, Clyde Holding and I, and our
colleagues between us seek a mandate consistent with the
Party Platform. We have shown federally that fully and
promptly we will discharge that mandate. That's why the
public are supporting the Party federally. I believe that
the public of Victoria are entitled to a reassurance that the
Labor Party will back the Government for which it works
the Governments for which the public gave a mandate. In that
way, ladies and gentlemen, at the time of your next assembly
you can not only have the Prime Minister and his Ministers but you
can have once again a Premier and a Labor Ministry as well. 



PRIME MINISTER 7 April 1973
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF
WESTERN MINING CORPORATION' S NICKEL SMELTER,
KALGOORLIE, 7 APRIL 1973
The opening of this smelter is more than a great new
milestone in the remarkable history of the Kalgoorlie
area; it is a mark of confidence of the Western Mining
Corporation in the area's futdre. And I come here today to
express and demonstrate my Government's complete confidence
in the future, not just of this area, but of the future of
the great and diverse resources of this vast western and
northern area of Australia.
Kalgoorlie itself is in a way a living symbol of
Australia's good fortune and it is a symbol also of Australia's
interdependence. Some of the very worst ravages of the
depression which struck the eastern colonies, particularly
Victoria, in the nineties were reduced by the timely discovery
of gold here. It is a matter of record that the personal and
family links between the west and the east, formed as a result
of the gold rush, played a key part in preventing the breakup
of the Federation, or West Australia's secession from it a
generation later. Kalgoorlie itself fell on hard times;
yet today even the gold industry is probably in better shape
than any time for the last decade. The future of the area
is probably brighter than any time in its history.
I would like to give a general outline of my Government's
attitude to the mineral resources of Australia and relate it
to this particular resource of nickel. We have to recognise
that the interests of the mining industry must be placed in the
perspective of the interests of Australia as a whole.
We do not ignore, but we cannot be pre-occupied with the short
term interest of a particular section of the economy or a
special interest within the economy. In short we have to plan
for the economy as a whole, in the interests of industry as a
whole and in the interests of the people as a whole. 9. 9 2/ 
And in such planning we have to take account of the wider
international realities. We have to recognise that Australia's
resources, great as they are, are not unlimited.
We have to recognise the growing concern in major industrialised
countries at the rapid depletion of traditional sources of
energy and raw materials. We have to see that our minerals are
sold at reasonable prices in world markets. We have to preserve
the interests of Australians yet unborn, to ensure that our
prosperity is not bought at the price of impoverishment
of future generations. And I mean not only material impoverishment
but the impoverishment of their environment. We have to preserve
for ourselves and for the generations to come the greatest
possible measure of Australian ownership and participation in
the mining industry.
These are the considerations behind the actions my Government
has already taken and those that we plan to take in the years
ahead. Nickel, of course, is basically an export industry.
Australian consumption is less than 8% of current Australian
production so I am very much aware that this industry has
been directly and in the short term, I acknowledge, unfavourably
affected by certain of our measures. You know that we have
placed controls on all mineral exports whether in raw or
semi-processed form. We aim to ensure that exports are sold at
reasonable prices on the world market. Our measures will
encourage more processing of minerals in Australia, lead to
greater employment opportunities, greater industry self
sufficiency and ultimately to a higher unit value for our
exports themselves. We can look to shipping economies for
both buyer and seller. I assure you, however, that in our quest
for these results we will use our powers and apply controls
judiciously, selectively, realistically.
We will be applying the same common sense judgement to
industries and to areas immediately affected by broader economic
adjustments such as those forced on us by developments in the
world currency situation. As you know we have taken certain
necessary steps to protect the Australian dollar. We would have
been failing in our duty to the Australian people as a whole
had we not done so. No section of Australian industry should
place a short term advantage against the long term well being
of the whole Australian economy.
I have said that my Government is determined to have more
processing of our own mineral resources. We are determined that
Australians shall have a greater degree of ownership and control
of their industries. On both these counts I am delighted to be
personally involved in this project today. The shareholding
of Western Mining Corporation is predominantly Australian and
its Board of Management is completely Australian. I know that
foreign companies have made overtures and these have been
resisted by Western Mining Corporation. My Government will
strongly support the Corporation in such efforts and such
resistance. This smelter is being located near Kalgoorlie partly
at the request of the West Australian Government. It signifies
participation by industry in plans for more balanced development. 
It is a splendid thing that the great mining skills built up
over generations in this area should be preserved and used in
the area. As a mark of our confidence, as a mark of our determination
to provide opportunities for youth to live and work in the place
where they were born and grew up, the Government proposes to
contribute to the new student residence being built at the
Kalgoorlie School of Mining. We will be contributing $ 75,000
to it and $ 35,000 to a recreation complex being built in
association with the school.
If we are to have more balanced development, if we are to
provide opportunities for our young men and women, if we are
to maintain and build up our national skills, if we are to
achieve more processing in Australia of Australian resources
we will need to have a greater and continuing co-operation
between governments and industry. We cannot achieve these
things without effective planning and we cannot have effective
planning without that sort of co-operation. In this State
we have already embarked upon some far reaching measures for
co-operation and participation in the development of its
mineral resources. Proper planning must transcend State borders;
for example we have agreed upon a feasibility study to determine
the route of a pipeline bringing the natural gas from
Palm Valley in the Northern Territory to Kalgoorlie then to
Perth and thence to the North-West Shelf. We hope to achieve
an assured and cheap supply of energy for the great industries
based in Kalgoorlie. The whole scope of our national pipeline
project is breathtaking but its the kind of thinking, the kind
of planning which we must have if Australian resources are to
be put to the best use for the greatest benefit of all
Australians. I believe that against long term prospects for
development now opening up before us the short term difficulties
fade into insignificance.
I congratulate the Corporation on its achievement and its
contribution. I congratulate this great and historic area of
Kalgoorlie on the great new chapter now unfolding in its history. 



NQ DATE
12 April 1973
ADDRESS BY SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE
The attached is the text of an address by the
Special Minister of State, Senator Don Willesee, to ' he
0 29th Session of E. C. A. F. E. ( 12 Aoril 1973) which is
currently meeting in Tokyo.
Senator Willesee was elected one of six Vice
Chairmen of the meeting ( others were Indonesia, China,
Iran, Neral and the Philippines). Ambassador Tsuruoka of
Japan was elected Chairman. 
I join in extending the Australian delegation's
warmest congratulations to you, Mr Chairman, and to our
Japanese hosts for the excellent arrangements for this
29th Session. Australia enjoys especially friendly relations
with your country which have an assured and firm foundation
in the interdependence of our economic relations. It is the
intention of Australia's new Government to work for still
better understanding between Australia and Japan and with all
countries in the ECAFE region.
Mr Chairman, the 29th Session of ECAFE holds promise
of marking the beginning of a new and more hopeful era in the
affairs of the ECAFE region. There are three major elements
in the present situation which call for special comment.
The first is the signing of the ceasefire agreements
in Viet-Nam and Laos. These agreements have been welcomed
throughout the world and particularly by the people of our
region. Although it would be unrealistic to overlook the
problems that are being encountered in carrying out the
various provisions of the agreements, it is our hope that
they will lead to the re-establishment on a firm basis of
conditions of peace in Viet-Nam and Laos. It is our hope
also that, despite the continuation and indeed the recent
intensificiation of fighting in Cambodia, a ceasefire may
soon be achieved in that country as well.
An end to hostilities throughout Indo-China would
improve the prospects of a successful assault on the major
obstacles and barriers to economic and social development / 2 
-2-
in a major area of South East Asia which forms such an important
part of the ECAFE region. We in Australia acknowledge that
there will be a great need for rehabilitation and reconstruction
in the post-war period in Indo-China and our Government intends
that Australia should assume a generous share of the reconstruction
effort. The first principle of any effective policy of
development assistance, whether multilateral or bilateral, is
that no programme can be effective unless it accords with the
expressed wishes of the receiving countries. It is perhaps too
early to attempt to identify the role which the United Nations
including ECAFE, may be called upon to play in the reconstruction
effort in Indo-China, but it is clear that the wishes of the
countries of Indo-China itself will determine the extent and
scope of such a role. If ECAFE is given a role in the work of
reconstruction, it will have Australia's full co-operation.
The task for all countries interested in contributing
to the reconstruction effort will be to find effective ways in
which to act. The winding down of the war may open up new
possibilities for the Mekong scheme and we shall be following
the possibilities with close attention through our association
with the work of the Mekong Committee. We would hope that,
under more peaceful conditions, the energies of the people of
Indo-China could be directed to the economic development of
their region Australia stands ready to participate with them
in this task through the Mekong and other schemes. Meanwhile 0 / 3 
-3-
I should like to record that the Australian Government is willing
to grant up to $ US500,000 for the second phase of the Nam Ngum
dam project. The Australian Government has established full diplomatic
relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and we are
now in the process of setting up an Embassy in Hanoi. A
significant part of the work of this Embassy is likely to be
concerned with possible Australian aid activities. We look
forward to the time when the Government of the DRV will be able
to make its contribution to regional co-operation.
The second element to which I refer is that China has
now taken her place in the community of nations and a delegation
from the People's Republic is present at this Session of ECAFE
for the first time. The Australian delegation extends a warm
welcome to the delegation of China. Our Government moved to
recognise and exchange diplomatic missions with China as soon
as we came into office. We believe that the absence of contact
with China had led to a build-up of inflexible attitudes which
inhibited the scope for co-operation and progress in our regioh
The ~. ssumption of its rightful place in ECAFE by the largest
country in the region should help to accelerate the movement
towards better understanding among all regional countries and
to give greater authority to the deliberations of ECAFE. The
Australian delegation looks forward to fruitful and constructive
co-operation with the delegation of China. / 4 
The third element concerns the administration of ' ECAFE
itself. This will be the last session at which U Nyun will be
present as Executive Secretary. I associate myself with the
leaders of other delegations who have paid tribute to his service
to the cause of advancing the economic and social wellbeing of
the Deople of this region for 14 years. He has been tenacious
in overcoming obstacles and in advancing the process of Asian
co-operation in the Asian way.
ECAFE has notched notable achievements during his oeriod
of office of which the creation of the Asian Development Bank
has possibly had the most impact. The Executive Secretary is
justified in taking -pride in his achievements, especially since
the last few years have been a difficult period for the region
and inevitably for ECAFE.
U Nyun will be succeeded as Executive Secretary by
Ambasspdor Maramis of Indonesia. Ambassador Maramis has had
a long experience in the Government and foreign service of his
country and he already has a strong background of work and
achievement in the economic field. We are confident that, under
his leadership, the Secretariat of ECAFE will meet the new
challenges of a more hopeful era. The new Executive Secretary
will have Australia's full support and co-operation.
Mr C'iairman, Papua New Guinea is represented at this,
as nt previous recent ECAFF sessions in its own right, on this
occasion by the Minister for Finance, Mr Julius Chan, who will 
explain the policies of his Government. All that I want to say,
as Australia's representative at the session, is that our
Government's policy is to move with all due speed towards the
creation of an independent, united Papua New Guinea. We propose
to reach this objective in the closest consultation with the
Government and the House of Assembly of Papua New Guinea within
the lifetime of the present Australian parliament. It is our
intention to introduce legislation providing that Papua New
Guinea should be self-governing by 1 December of this year or as
soon as practicable thereafter. Australia is deeply committed
to continue a substantial programme of economic aid to an
independent Papua New Guinea.
The peace and prosperity of the ECAFE region is a major
commitment of the Australian Government. We see our participation
in this Economic Commission as affording opportunities by which
we will be able, as a significant economic power in the region,
to identify and adopt constructive policies aimed at honouring
this commitment. We shall be looking to the discussions within
ECAFE for guidance and stimulation.
The Secretariat is to be commended for its systematic
presentation of social and economic performance in the region
for the First Biennial Review of the second United Nations
Development Decade in conjunction with the Economic survey for
1972. The Survey shows, however, that the performance of
individual developing countries are continuing to fall short of / 6 
-6-
desirable levels of achievement. The average weighted annual
growth rate for all ECAFE developing countries reached almost
7% by 1969, but had fallen back to 5.6% in 1971 and the survey
states that it may have been below this level in 1972.
The rapid and sustained reduction in mass poverty,
which is recognised as a special priority goal for the ECAFE
region, is not being achieved at current rates of growth in
production, while population continues to increase at high
levels in some cases up to 3.5% per annum. The table on
page 34 of the English language text shows that in 1971, GNP
per person grew at substantial rates of over 7% in only two
of the nine countries listed Iran and the Republic of Korea.
Indonesia achieved an encouraging 3.8% per capita but the per
capita rates for the other countries were all below and in some
countries will below 3%.
The survey explains the slower growth rates in terms
of two major short-term factors: the slowing down in the
economies of Japan, Western Europe and North America and the
droughts and other adverse conditions which afflicted agriculture
and crops in most ECAFE countries in 1971 and 72.
The first of these factors points up the need to
solve the problems of basic economic stability and growth in the
advanced economies so as to provide the essential conditions
for stable trade and payments. The survey rightly draws
attention to the benefits for the developing countries from
steady growth and high levels of employment in advanced ./ 7 
-7-
economies accompanied by a rational solution to the current
international monetary problems.
7CAFE will not be able to do its best work until these
problems are being successfully tackled. Individual developing
countries will be able to plan effectively for their development
and for the welfare of their people only in circumstances which
offer reasonable predictability of income prospects and trade
returns. These are the preconditions for making more resources
available for human welfare.
The restoration of order in the international monetary
system will require concerted efforts by individual countries to
achieve equilibrium in their own balance of payments. Australia
is working actively within the Committee of Twenty to further the
possibility of reforming the international monetary system and
it is reassuring that the developing countries of our region are
represented in the Committee by India and Indonesia.
In the latter part of the year, a further round of
trade and tariff negotiations within the GATT should commence
and we will be working for meaningful results which recognise
the particular interests of the developing countries as well
as countries like Australia which are major exporters of primary
products. We hope that developing countries, particularly the
countries of this region, will avail themselves of the opportunities
available under Australia's scheme of tariff preferences for / 8 
-8-
developing countries which has now been in operation for seven
years. Our Minister for Overseas Trade recently announced a
further extension of the scheme and we have been active in bringing
concessions under the scheme to the attention of regional countries.
I would like to stress that our representatives are always
available for consultation on ways of taking advsntage of the
scheme. Against the background of uncertainties surrounding the
future of international tri'de and payments, it is not surprising,
though disappointing, that the total flow of resources from the
adva~ nced economies to developing countries in the region has
continued to decline. In 1971, the developed countries as a
whole contributed only .35% of their GNP to the developing
countries in the form of official aid compared with .53% at the
beginning of the 19601s. Australia has maintained its good aid
Derformance of the recent Dast and the annual flow of official
development assistance from Australia remains at over of
GNP. Meanwhile we have continued to surpass the 1% Target for
the'transfer of all resources, official and private, for each
of the last three years and this situation seems likely to
persist at least for the next year or so. The total value of
Australiats official aid for the current financial year is likely
to be $ A220 million or $ US308 million and has been increasing at
around 11% per annum. As delegations are aware, nearly all of
this assistance goes to the countries of this region.
Our Prime Minister has indicated publicly that Australia's
intention is to have a substantially increased foreign aid 0 1/ 9 
-9-
programme and we are currently working to improve still further
the quality of the programme.
We expect these efforts to result in a closer alignment
of our programmes with the policy measures which are emphasized
in the survey. In collaboration with recipient countries we will, for
example, be looking intensively into the nossibilities of giving
greater emphasis to sovial fields and to the effects of our
programmes on income distribution and employment uroblems.
We will also be looking into the possibilities of
increasing the number of our projects in rural areas so as to
bring benefits more directly to the people of developing
countries. Mr Chairman, there are many practical problems in
achieving effective regional co-operation in an area as vast
as the ECAFE region and the Australian delegation is concerned
that the approach of ECAFE to questions of regional co-operation
should be constructive and pragmatic. Accordingly, it would
seem desirable to outline, in broad terms, some thoughts on
ways in which ECAFE might strive to develop more effective
techniques for tackling some of the practical problems of
regional co-operation.
In recent years there have been criticisms that the
sheer size and scone of the Commission's activities, although 
well intentioned, have imposed a heavy administrative burden
on the Commission and on Governments. For understandable
reasons, ECAFE has given much of its attention to approaching
problems on a region-wide basis. A number of the Commission's
projects have been of considerable value to the region, but
other proposals have not been launched because of the difficulties
of Dutting them into practice.
Sub-regional approaches have been adopted but usually
in regard to a limited range of topics of interest to a small
number of countries. Some examples are seen in the work of the
TyTIihoon Control Cor. mittee, the Mekong Co-ordination Committee,
the Committee for Off-shore Oil Prospecting and the Asian Commodity
Communities. These activities have generally been of considerable
value to member countries and we feel that the Commission might
be encouraged to apply more of its resources to ways and means of
developing sub-regional approaches to problems. One technique
might be to select groups of member countries with common
problems, and to deal with tlhem through task forces cutting
across individual disciplines and sectors where necessary.
We are not, of course, suggesting that tI-e Commission
abandon regional projects of proven value and indeed we encourage
all measures of regional co-operation which are feasible and
practical. We feel however that a greater degree of emphasis
on the sub-regional approach could lead to a more positive
identification of solutions for pnarticular problems and could
facilitate tI-e mounting of projects which have clearly
identifiable and attainable aims. Regional developing countries
have themselves been showing the way. 
-11-
Mr Chairman, there are two broad areas which are
currently the subject of intense discussion internationally and
within countries: these concern the environment and population.
There have been profound chianges in the attitudes of governments
in our region to these two matters in the recent past. Australia's
attitude to both questions is positive and our government looks
forward -to effective co-operation with Asian ana Pacific countries
in these two areas.
We understand and sympathise with member countries in
their efforts to arrive at an appreciation of where the emphasis
should be placed as between the objectives of economic and social
development on the one hand and the maintenance of a sound
environment on the other. We consider that the most fruitful
approach is to regard the objective of maintaining a sound
environment as complementary to, rather th-an in conflict with,
the objectives of economic and social development. The problems
are com~ lex, however, and ECAFE should be able to assist
Governments to formulate realistic policies for environmental
protection as they pursue their developmental goals.
ECAFE will have a sound basis for its work in the
relevant proposals of the Stockholm conference which have been
adopted by the General Assembly. Australia has already shown
its support for international co-operation on environmental
matters by pledging a contribution of $ US2.5 million to the
U. N. fund. ./ 12 
-12-
There is widespread acknowledgement by regional
governments that the adoption of effective measures to limit
rates of population growth is an important factor in the
achievement of improved living standards.
The Australian delegation welcomes the work of the
R. CAFT7 Secretariat in the population field. The contribution of
the Secretariat was a major factor in the success of the Second
Asian Population Conference held in Tokyo last November.
Australia is now contributing funancially to the major
international population funds and we expect that in future we
will he able to assist ECAFE countries on a more vigorous basis
in this im-oortant area. The contribution of the ECAFE region to
the World Population Conference in 1974 will he a particularly
significant one. We shall be aiming to ensure that Autai'
position at the Conference is closely aligned with that of
our friends in this region.
Mr Chairman, the Australian Goverhment intends that
Australia should. have warm, friendly and co-operative relations
with all countries in the region. Our attitude on United Nations
matters is in close alignment with those of our friends in this
region. This anplies here in ECAFE, as well as in the other
organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council.
The Australian Government will work strenuously for the
improvement of co-operation in the region and intends to give its
full backing to the valuable contribution of ECAFE to the tasks
of economic and social progress in this the most populous part
of the world. 



SPEECIH BY. THE PRIME MINISTER,
1TE lION, E. G, WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE i'ITH ANNUAL CONVIENTION OF THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY OF N. SW.,
HOTEL FLORIDA, TERRIGAL, N, SJW., 5 MAY 1973
PRICES, INCOMES AND INFLATION
IT IS TEMPTING TO BELI'EVE THAT A SUCCESSFUL PRICES
AND INCOMES POLICY CAN BE A MAGIC REMEDY, NOT ONLY FOR
INFLATION, BUT FOR ALL THE ILLS OF SOCIETY, IF ONLY
-GOVERNMENTS COULD CONTROL PRICES AND WAGES SO THE ARGUMENT
GOES WE WOULD BE WELL ON THE WAY TO A MORE JUST AND
PROSPEROUS NATION. THE DILIGENCE WITH WHICH PRICES AND
INCOMES POLICIES ARE PURSUED IN MANY WESTERN COUNTRIES IS
TESTIMONY TO THE POWER OF THIS IDEA. THAT THESE POLICIES
HAVE SO OFTEN FAILED OR AT BEST MET WITH LIMITED SUCCESS
HAS NOT DETERRED OTHER COUNTRIES FROM ATTEMPTING THEM,
11/ 2,, 
AUSTRALIA IS NO EXCEPTION, MY OWN GOVERNMENT,
AS YOU KNOW, IS COMMITTED TO A RANGE OF ANTI-INFLATIONARY
POLICIES INCLUDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL, BY WHICH WVIE INTEND TO BRING THE MOST FORMIDABLE
OFFICIAL AND PUBLIC PRESSURE TO BEAR IN AN EFFORT TO KEEP
PRICES DOWN, NEXT THURSDAY" WE SHALL BE MEETING THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS IN CANBERRA TO D'ISCUSS ' THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION
AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS TO IT,
FOR LET THERE BE NO DOUBT OF HOW SERIOUSLY MY
GOVERNMENT REGARDS THIS PROBLEM OR THE STRENGTH OF OUR
DETERMINATION TO TACKLE IT, INFLATION IS INCREASINGLY
RECOGNISED AS THE MOST FORMIDABLE AND INTRACTABLE PROBLEM
OF ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT, MANY GOVERNMENTS AROUND THE WORLD
NOW BELIEVE THIS TO BE SO. THE PACE OF INFLATION HAS
QUICKENED IN THE 1970s IN MOST COUNTRIES, AUSTRALIA INCLUDED,
IT IS ALREADY BECOMING CLEAR THAT THE THREAT OF
INFLATION WILL BE THE MOST SERIOUS ECONOMIC PROBLEM
FACING THE GOVERNMENT, THE LABOUR MARKET HAS MOVED RAPIDLY
IN RECENT MONTHS TOWARDS FULL EMPLOYMENT LEVELS AND THE
TREND SEEMS CERTAIN TO CONTINUE, WE WELCOME THIS; WE
ENCOURAGED IT, BUT IN SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES THERE IS THE
MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY FOR PRODUCERS TO RAISE PRICES, THE
LEAST INCENTIVE TO RESIST INCREASING COSTS, AND THE LEAST
OPPORTUNITY FOR EFFECTIVE CONSUMER RESISTANCE, 
PROBABLY THERE IS NO SINGLE SOLUTION PRACTICABLE
OR IMPRACTICAL, JUST OR UNJUST TO THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION,
THERE ARE, HOWEVER, SOME CLEAR CONCLUSIONS TO BE DRAWN FROM
AUSTRALIAN AND OVERSEAS EXPERIENCE ABOUT THE REQUIREMENTS
OF AN EFFECTIVE ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY, A PRE-CONDITION
FOR SUCH A POLICY IS EFFICIENt MANAGEMENT OF OVERALL DEMAND
BY SOUND BUDGETARY AND CREDIT POLICIES, No POLICY, OR
COMBINATION OF POLICIES, DESIGNED TO AFFECT PRICES OR
INCOMES DIRECTLY CAN BE SUCCESSFUL IF EXCESSIVE PRESSURES
ON RESOURCES ARE'ALLOWED TO DEVELOP,
SECONDLY, THE OVERALL ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT MUST BE
RIGHT, THE EXCHANGE RATE MUST BE APPROPRIATE, POLICIES
ON RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES, TARIFFS AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
MUST ENCOURAGE COMPETITION AND LIMIT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PUSHING UP PRICES, GOVERNMENTSAND THEIR AUTHORITIES MUST
FOLLOW RESPONSIBLE POLICIES ON PRICING AND EMPLOYMENT
CONDITIONS, THIS IS THE CONTEXT INTO WHICH PRICES AND
INCOMES POLICIES HAVE TO BE FITTED, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES
THAT THERE IS A PLACE FOR SUCH POLICIES, BUT IT DOES NOT
BELIEVE THEY ARE A CURE-ALL FOR INFLATION, v 
THERE ARE, OF COURSE, FAVOURABLE FACTORS IN THE
PRESENT SITUATION, THE RISING STRENGTH OF THE LABOUR
MARKET SHOULD ENABLE POLICIES DESIGNED TO RESTRAIN PRICES
TO BE UNDERTAKEN WITHOUT FEAR , OF CREATING GENERAL UNEMPLOYMENT.
THE STRENGTH OF THE CURRENT BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE HIGH
LEVEL OF INTERNATIONAL RESERVES ( DESPITE THE WITHDRAWAL OF
SOME FUNDS AFTER THE RECENT CURRENCY REALIGNMENTS) ALSO MEAN
THAT WE CAN CONTEMPLATE AN INCREASED INFLOW OF IMPORTED
GOODS WITHOUT ANXIETY ON THE INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNT.
WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN HELPFUL ACTION ON THE EXCHANGE
RATE. AN EXCHANGE RATE WHICH UNDERVALUES THE DOMESTIC
CURRENCY INCREASES THE COST OF IMPORTED GOODS, INCLUDING
MATERIALS FOR INDUSTRY, PREVENTS EFFECTIVE COMPETITION BY
IMPORTS, REDUCES RESISTANCE BY PRODUCERS TO RISING COSTS,
AND HELPS MAKE THE CONSUMER HELPLESS IN THE FACE OF ORGANISED
PRICE INCREASES, OUR REVALUATION OF THE DOLLAR LAST DECEMBER
WAS A VALUABLE ANTI-INFLATIONARY MEASURE, 1/ 5. 
FURTHERMORE, my GOVERNMENT HAS UNDERTAKEN A RANGE
OF SPECIAL ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICIES, DON'T WANT MY
REMARKS TO SOUND TOO MUCH LIKE A RECITAL OF GOVERNMENT
POLICY THE PROPER PLACE FOR THAT WOULD BE IN VICTORIA
RATHER THAN TERRIGAL BUT I SHALL MENTION BRIEFLY SOME OF
THE THINGS WE ARE DOING. L HAVE REFERRED TO OUR PRICES
TRIBUNAL. WE HAVE ALSO ESTABLISHED A JOINT PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE TO REVIEW PRICES IN KEY SECTORS, WE WILLSTRENGTHEN
THE LAWS AGAINST RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES,
WE WILL USE OUR POWERS THROUGH TARIFFS, SUBSIDIES AND CONTRACTS
TO PREVENT UNJUSTIFIED PRICE RISES WHEREVER WE CAN, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS THE NATION'I S BIGGEST SINGLE CUSTOMER
AND MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE CONSUMER, As SUCH IT CAN EXERCISE
A CONSIDERABLE INFLUENCE ON PRICE MOVEMENTS, BY HELPING THE
CONSUMER TO A BETTER AND INFORMED AWARENESS OF THE PRICE AND
QUALITY OF AVAILABLE GOODS, WIE CAN DO MUCH TO DISCOURAGE
EXORHITANT OR IRRESPONSIBLE PRICE RISES,
IN THE LAST RESORT, HOWEVER, THERE IS A LIMIT TO
WHAT ANY GOVERNMENT CAN DO TO CONTROL THE LEVELS OF PRICES
OR WAGES, IT IS TRUE GOVERNMENTS CAN R'ESORT TO A STATUTORY
FREEZE IMPOSED BY EXECUTIVE ORDER, SOME COUNTRIES HAVE
ATTEMPTED THESE CONTROLS; NO COUNTRY HAS REGARDED THEM AS
ANYTHING BUT A TEMPORARY MEASURE, IN DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
THERE IS A LIMIT TO THE WAY THESE POWERS CAN BE USED. THERE
IS A LIMIT TO THEIR EFFECTIVENESS,# THERE IS A LIMIT TO THEIR
POLITICAL ACCEPTABILITY IN A FREE SOCIETY, THERE IS A LIMIT
TO THEIR ENFORCEABILITY, THERE IS A LIMIT TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE
MACHINERY NEEDED TO SUPERVISE THEM, 
6,
IN OTHER WORDS, IN ANYTHING SHORT OF A TOTALITARIAN
SOCIETY, GOVERNMENTS ARE RESTRAINED IN THEIR ABILITY TO ADJUST
WAGES AND PRICES AS THEY PLEASE. OUR PROPER CONCERN, THEREFORE,
IS NOT WITH WHAT GOVERNMENTS CANNOT DO, BUT WITH WHAT THEY
CA. AND SHOULD DO. THE QUALITY OF LIFE WHAT USED TO BE
CALLED THE STANDARD OF LIVING..-DEPENDS ON A WHOLE RANGE OF
CONDITIONS AND SERVICES WHICH GloVERNMENTS CAN DETERMINE AND
PROVIDE, WHICHi GOVERNMENTS ALONE CAN DETERMINE AND PROVIDE.
A MANUFACTURER CAN INCREASE THE PRICE OF HIS GOODS; HE CANNOT
PROVIDE A HOUSING SCHEME, A DOCTOR CAN RAISE HIS FEES AT
LEAST HIE MAY THINK HE CAN BUT HE CANNOT PROVIDE A HEALTH
SERVICE. A BUSINESS F* IRM CAN INCREASE ITS CHARGES: IT CANNOT
PROVIDE MORE SCHOOLS, BETTER ROADS'OR IMPROVED COMMUNITY SERVICES,
THESE THINGS ARE THE PROVINCE OF GOVERNMENTS,
ISIMPLY MAKE THE POINT THAT THE SEARCH FOR A PRICES
AND INCOMES POLICY HOWEVER DESIRABLE IT MAY BE MUST NOT
BECOME A SUBSTITUTE FOR ACTION IN AREAS WHERE GOVERNMENTS HAVE
A REAL AND UNCHALLENGED POWER TO IMPROVE THE STANDARDS OF OUR
LIVES, NOR MUST THE FEAR OF INFLATION BLIND US TO THE FACT
THAT THERE ARE WORSE ECONOMIC EVILS, IDO NOT ACCEPT THAT THE
DELIBERATE CREATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT CAN * EVER BE AN ACCEPTABLE
REMEDY TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES. [ HIS VIEW IS STILL HELD BY
SOME OF OUR OPPONENTS. IN THE PAST, BUDGETS HAVE BEEN FRAMED
AND ECONOMIC POLICIES IMPLEMENTED IN BLIND SUBSERVIENCE TO THIS
CRUEL AND DISCREDITED THEORY, EVEN IF THE. THEORY WERE TRUE, MY
GOVERNM~ ENT WOULD UNHESITATINGLY REJECT SUCH AN APPROACH, THE
CURE WOULD BE WORSE THAN THE DISEASE, 1 17 a 
7,
THE REAL VICTIMS-OF INFLATION ARE THOSE ON SMALL
INCOMES -MORE ESPECIALLY THOSE ON FIXED INCOMES, FOR THE
MAN WHO MUST SPEND NEARLY ALL OF HIS INCOME IN ORDER TO LIVE,
INCREASES OF A NEW CENTS IN THE BASIC COMMODITIES ARE KEENLY
FELT. THEY MAY INDEED BE CRUCIAL TO HIS HEALTH, HIS WELL-BEING,
HIS COMFORT. HIoW THEN CAN A HUMANE GOVERNMENT BEST ASSIST HIM?
THE TRUTH IS THAT EVEN IF INFLATION IS CONTROLLED, THE MAN ON
SUCH AN INCOME IS STILL AT A CRIPPLING DISADVANTAGE. GOVERNMENTS
CAN THEREFORE HELP HIM BY ATTACKING THE SOCIAL INJUSTICES THAT
DISCRIMINATE AGAINST HIM AND RENOVATING THE INEFFICIENT PUBLIC
SERVICES HE IS FORCED TO USE.
LET US TAKE THE TYP-ICAL ' AUSTRALIAN TYPICAL AS
PORTRAYED BY THE STATISTICIANS. YOU WILL NOTICE TONIGHT THAT
IHAVE REFRAINED FROM USING TOO MANY STATISTICS. ISUSPECT
THAT IN THE PAST 24i HOURS YOU HAVE HAD A SURFEIT OF THEM. IT
IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER WHAT WALTER BAGEHOT SAID OF STATISTICS:
" THE ECONOMIST USES STATISTICS MUCH AS THE DRUNKARD USES LAMPPOSTS
FOR SUPPORT RATHER THAN ILLUMINATION." NEVERTHELESS,
WE MAY CONSIDER AN AUSTRALIAN EARNING $ 1011 A WEEK AS AN EMPLOYEE
( THOUGH THE AV'ERAGE WAGE MUST NOT BE REGARDED AS THE TYPICAL
WAGE), BRINGING up 2AL CHILDREN AND LIVING IN A SUBURB OR TOWN
OF 10,000 PEOPLE, THE FIRST AIM OF A MODERN GOVERNMENT MUST
BE TO ENSURE THAT HIS EMPLOYMENT IS SECURE, 1/ 81 1 
8,
BY ABOLISHING THE INEFFICIENCY AND UNFAIRNESS OF
THE PRESENT HEALTH SCHEME WE CAN REDUCE THE COST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
OF THE AVERAGE MANI WE CAN REMOVE THE FEARS AND DOUBTS OF
THOSE WHO STILL HESITATE BEFORE MAKING AN EXTRA VISIT TO THE
DOCTOR, BY ATTACKING INEQUALITY IN EDUCATION FROM PRE-SCHOOLS
THROUGH TO UNIVERSITIES WE CAN ENSURE THAT THOSE ON LOW
INCOMES WILL NOT BE DISADVANTAGED MORE THAN OTHERS THROUGH
THE EROSION OF THAT PART OF THEIR INCOME THEY SPEND ON
EDUCATION FOR THEIR CHILDREN, PENSIONERS THOSE ON FIXED
INCOMES, THE PRIMARY VICTIMS OF INFLATION MUST BE ASSURED
THAT IN ILLNESS THEY WILL GET ALL POSSIBLE CARE, AND THAT
THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST AND THE INTRODUCTION OF
NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION WILL HELP REMOVE THE HARDSHIPS OF
RETIREMENT, WHEN THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ARE MOST UNSPARING,
NONE OF THESE MEASURES CAN BE REGARDED AS-A CURE
FOR INFLATION, THEY ARE NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR A SUCCESSFUL
PRICES AND INCOMES POLICY, ANY MORE THAN A PRICES AND INCOMES
POLICY CAN BE A SUBSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL REFORM, MY GOVERNMENT
BELIEVES THAT RESTRAINTS ON PRICES, ANDTHE ORDERLY DETERMINATION
OF PERSONAL INCOMES, ARE MERELY ONE INGREDIENT IN THE RECIPE
FOR A MORE JUST AND PROSPEROUS NATION, 
IHA\' E NO DOUBT, FROM THE ATTENDANCE AT THIS
SEMINAR, AND œ EEING SO MANY DISTINGUISHED SPEAKERS, THAT YOU
HAVE MADE A VALUABLE STUDY OF A DIFFICULT AND PERHAPS
INTRACTABLE PROBLEM, I CONGRATULATE THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES ON. ITS MOST SUCCESSFUL MEETING.
IT IS A TRUISW TO SAY TH4AT THERE ARE NO EASY SOLUTIONS TO
MODERN INFLATION OR THE FEASIBILITY OF PRICE-INCOME POLICIES.
MY CONCERN IS TO REMIND YOU THAT WHILE WE MAY NOT KNOW THE
ACCEPTABLE SOLUTIONS, AT LEAST WE KNOW THOSE WHICH ARE NQT
ACCEPTABLE. N'O SOL. UTION IS ACCEPTABLE IF ITS BURDENS ARE
NOT SHARED FAIRLY BY THE WH1OLE COMMUNITY, NO SOLUTION IS
ACCEPTABLE IF IT DISCRIMIIATES AGAINST THE VEAKEST AND MOST
DEFENCELESS SECTIONS OF SOCIETY. No SOLUTION IS ACCEPTABLE
IF IT TOLERATE: HIGH LEVELS OF UNEMPLOYMENT, NO SOL. UTION IS
ACCEPTABLE IF T IGNORES THE NEED FOR FUNDAMENTAL REFORMS,
IT IS WITHIN THOSE LIMITS, AND UPON THOSE CONDITIONS, THAT
INFLATION MUST BE FOUGHT. MY GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT WITH
YOUR CO-OPERATION, THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL SIDES OF INDUSTRY,
THE BATTLE CAN BE WON. 



NEW SOUTH WALES-ZIONIST COUNCIL.
CELEBRATIONS OF ISRAEL's 25TH ANNIVERSARY
ADDRESS'BY THE PRIME MINISTER.-MR E. G. WHITLAM
SYDNEY TOWN HALL 6 MAY 1973.
THE REQUIREMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY DO
NOT ALWAYS PERMIT THE FULL EXPRESSION OF A NATION'IS DEEPER
FEELINGS ABOUT INTERNAT. IONAL AFFAIRS.". FOR EXAMPLE, THE.
POLICY ON THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTMY
OWN AND ALL THOSE WHO PRECEDED IT IN THE LAST TWO DECADESHAS
BEEN OFFICIALLY EXPRESSED IN THESE TERMS:-
" AUSTRALIA'S POLICY TOWARDS THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE
IS ONE OF NEUTRALITY AND OF SYMPATHETIC INTEREST
IN A SETTLEMENT. AUSTRALIA HAS MAINTAINED FRIENDLY
RELATIONS WITH BOTH SI-DES BECAUSE WE HAVE NO MAJOR
ROLE IN THE AREA AND HAVE AVOIDED ACCORDINGLY
STRIKING A PARTISAN ATTITUDE."
Now, WHILE THESE HAVE BEEN THE BROAD GUIDELINES FOR
SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS AND WOULD BE A FAIR ENOUGH EXPRESSION
OF AVERAGE AUSTRA LIAN OPINION, I CANNOT. IMAGINE THAT IT WOULD
BE REGARDED BY ZIONISTS OR THE JEWISH COMMUNITY GENERALLY AS
THE DEFINITIVE VIEW ON THE MATTER. AND THE FACT IS, OF COURSE,
THAT WHILE SUCCESSIVE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS.-MAINTAIN NEUTRALITY
ON THE DISPUTE THEY HAVE NOT BEEN NEUTRAL AND ARE NOT NEUTRAL
ON BASIC ELEMENTS OF THE DISPUTE. WE ARE NOT NEUTRAL ON THE
QUESTION OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF ISRAEL; THE SOVEREIG NTY OF ISRAEL
IS NOT NEGOTIABLE. THE RIGHTS OF JEWS TO GO TO THE NATIONAL
. HOMELANDA ND TO LIVE THERE IN FREEDOM AND PEACE ARE NOT TO BE
DENIED. THE RIGHT OF ISRAEL TO DEFEND HER BORDERS AND PRESERVE 
INTACT THE GREAT DEMOCRACY WHICH FLOURISHES THERE IS NOT A MATTER
ON WHICH THIS OR ANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS EVER BEEN NEUTRAL.
WE NOT ONLY ACCEPT ISRAEL's MORAL RIGHTS IN ALL THESE MATTERS BUT
ACCEPT OUR OWN MORAL RESPONSIBILITY As EUROPEANS AND AS
BELLIGERENTS IN THE WAR AGAINST FASCISM AND PERSECUTION TO
UPHOLD THOSE RIGHTS. AND THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY THE
PARTY OF HERBERT VERE EVATT FREELY ACKNOWLEDGES ITS SPE CIAL
RESPONSIBILITIES, AND ITS INTIMATEASSOCIATION WITH THE
GOVERNMENT AND +' EOPLE OF ISRAEL. THERE ARE OTHER MATTERS ON
WHICH WE CANNOT BE NEUTRAL. WE CANNOT, FOR INSTANCE, BE
NEUTRAL TOWARDS THE WORLD-WIDE PATTERN OF TERROR AND REPRISAL
THAT HAS DEVELOPED FROM THE MIDDLE EAST DISPUTE AND FROM WHICH
CITIZENS OF ISRAEL, INNOCENT MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN HAVE BEEN
AMONGST THE CHIEF VICTIMS.
IT IS AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF THESE ATTITUDES THAT
IWISH TO PUT AUSTRALIA'S RECENT STAND IN THE SECURITY ' COUNC IL,.
A STAND WHICH HAS BEEN MISUNDERSTOOD IN SOME QUARTERS. -ON 21
APRIL AUSTRALIA VOTED IN-THE SECURITY COUNCIL WITH BRITAIN,
INDIA, INDONESIA, FRANCE, AUSTRIA, YUGOSLAVIA, SUDAN, KENYAf
PANAMA AND PERU CONDEMNING THE RAID BY ISRAELI FORCES INTO
LEBANON ON 10 APRIL. NO MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL VOTED AGAINST
THE MOTION BUT THE UNITED STATES, THE SOVIET UNION, CHINA AND
GUINEA ABSTAINED. OUR ACTUAL VOTE TELLS ONLY A VERY SMALL
PART OF THE ACTIVITIES ON THIS MATTER TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AND ITS REPRESENTATIVES IN NEW YORK. ON 13 APRILTHREE
DAYS AFTER THE RAID -ISENT THE FOLLOWING GUIDELINES TO
OUR REPRESENTATIVE ON THE SECURITY COUNCIL: 
3.
FIRST, THAT ANY AUSTRALIAN STATEMENT SHOULD DEPLORE
VIOLENCE AND TERRORISM BY EITHER SIDE IN THE PRESENT
SITUATION; SECONDLY THAT WE SHOULD IN OUR STATEMENTS
AND ACTIVITIES SEEK TO MAINTAIN THE ESTABLISHED POLICY OF
NEUTRALITY AND EVENHANDEDNESS; THIRDLY THAT WE SHOULD
USE OUR EFFORTS TO ACHIEVEA RESOLUTION WHICH WOULD WIN
UNANIMOUS SUPPORT AND THAT WjOULD O-PERATE TO QUIETEN
RATHER THAN-FURTHER INFLAME THE SITUATION; AND FINALLY
THAT IF A RESOLUTION STRONGLY UNFAIR TO EITHER SIDE SHOULD
BE SUBMITTED, THE DELEGATION SHOULD USE ITS. DISCRETION TO
OPPOSE IT OR TO ABSTAIN.
ACCORDINGLY OUR DEELEGATION WORKED FOR A RESOLUTION WHICH, WHILE
CENSURING ISRAEL FOR ITS INTRUSION ON LEBANESE SOVEREIGNTY, TOOK
A BALANCED APPROACH TO THE WHOLE PATTERN OF VIOLENCE AND REPRISAL
IN THE MIDDLE EAST. BUT NONE OF THE DRAFT RESOLUTION'S OF THEIR.
AMENDMENTS INTRODUCED PRIOR TO THE ANGLO-FRENCH DRAFT OF 21
APRIL.-WHICH WAS THE ONE UPON WHICH THE VOTE WAS TAKEN -WERE
ACCEPTABLE To AUSTRALIA.
SO IT WILL BE SEEN THAT THERE WERE TWO IMPORTANT
PRINCIPLES EXPRESSED BY OUR APPROACH THAT NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
MUST BE UPHELD AND THAT TERRORISM MUST BE OPPOSED. IN THE LONG
TERM, FOR THAT MATTER AT ANY TIME 7ISRAEL'IS OWIN INTERESTS AS
MUCH AS ANY OTHER NATION'S -ABSOLUTELY REQUIRE THAT THOSE
PRINCIPLES ARE UPHELD.
IN HIS STATEMENT TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON 1.7 APRIL
OUR AMBASSADOR, SIR LAURENCE-MACINTYRE, EMPHASISED THE NEED TO 
BREAK THE CYCLE OF VIOLENCE. HE SAID, ON BEHALF OF AUSTRALIA:-
" IN AUSTRALIA'S VIEW THE FIRST AND, WE BELIEVE, THE MOST
POSITIVE AND HELPFUL STEP TOWARDS A JUST, SECURE AND
LASTING PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST MIGHT BE TO BREAK THE
CYCLE OF AGGRESSION AND REPRISAL AND THUS TO TURN BACK
THE WAVE OF MURDEROUS VIOLENCE AND TERROR THAT HAS SPREAD
OUTWARDS FROM THE MIDDLE EAST ACROSS THE WORLD. IF WE
ARE RIGHT IN THIS BELIEF, THERE SEEMS TO BE LITTLE POINT
IN CONSIDERING THE LATEST ISRAELI ACT IN ISOLATION FROM
THE LAST OF'THE HORRIFYING MATRIX OF RECENT INTERNATIONAL
VIOLENCE-AND TERRORISM. WHETHER THE ACTIONS ENGAGED BY
THE GOVERNMENT OF ISRAEL ARE TO BE REGARDED AS AN ACT
OF AGGRESSION OR RETALIATION, OR PRECAUTION OR SELF
DEFENCE, IT IS ONLY ONE OF A SUCCESSION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
IN RESPECT OF WHICH SOME OF ISRAEL'S NEIGHBOURIN GOVERNMENTS
CAN SCARCELY ESCAPE CHARGES OF COMPLICITY OR AT LEAST
ACQUIESCENCE. IT IS PART OF A VICIOUS CIRCLE AND CANNOT
BE SEPARATED FROM ITS SURROUNDING PATTERN OF VIOLENCE, IF
THIS COUNCIL IS TO GEN ERATE A NEW MOMENTUM IN ITS EFFORTS
TO BRING ABOUT A JUST, SECURE AND LASTING PEACE IN THE
MIDDLE EAST. IF THE UNITED NATIONS FAILS TO PUT AN ENDTO
THE FURTHER ESCALATION AND PROLIFERATION OF
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM IT IS, LIABLE TO HAVE MATTERS
TAKEN OUT OF ITS HANDS."
THE SECURITY COUNCIL HAD BEFORE IT A DRAFT-RESOLUTION
FROM LEBANON CALLING UPON ALL STATES TO REFRAIN FROM PROVIDING
ISRAEL WITH ANY ASSISTANCE WHICH WOULD FACILITATE MILITARY ATTACKS 
AND THREATEN FURTHER SECURITY COUNCIL ACTION IF SUCH ATTACKS
WERE REPEATED. WE CONSIDERED THAT THESE ONE-SIDED TERMS WERE
UNACCEPTABLE AND FURTHER MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED BY BRITAIN
STILL FAILED TO MAKE THE DRAFT SUFFICIENTLY FAIR TO ISRAEL TO
ATTRACT OUR SUPPORT.
FOLLOWING SIR LAURENCV'S STATEMENT A NEW ANGLO-FRENCH
DRAFT WAS INTRODUCED ON 19 APRILI WE BELIEVED THAT THE CHANGES
WENT SOME DISTANCE AT LEAST TOWARDS INJECTING A MEASURE OF
BALANCE INTO THE RESOLUTION AND OUR REPRESENTATIVE BELIEVED THAT
ALTHOUGH THE NEXT TEXT WAS NOT ENTIRELY SATISFACTORY, AN
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE WAS POSSIBLE. IN EXPLANATION OF OUR VOTE
SIR LAURENCE SAID:-
" IN THE VIEW OF my GOVERNMENT A CONDEMNATORY JUDGEMENT
WHICH WOULD HAVE TREATED THE PARTICULAR ACT,
REPREHENSIBLE AS IT WAS, IN ISOLATION FROM THE REfST
OF THE PATTERN OF PROVOCATIVE VIOLENCE, TERROR AND
REPRISAL OF WHICH IT IS UNDOUBTEDLY A PART, AND WHICH
IS ENCROACHING ON THE SAFETY OF LIFE EVERYWHERE, WOULD
HAVE AMOUNTED TO A DISTORTION BY THE COUNCIL OF THE
REALITIES OF THE SITUATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND WOULD
SCARCELY BE LIKELY TO HELP TOWARDS A SETTLEMENT OF ITS
STUBBORN PROBLEMS. 
6,
THE CHANGES THAT HAVE BEEN MADE GO SOME DISTANCE
AT LEAST TOWARDS INJECTING A MEASURE OF BALANCE INTO
THE RESOLUTION TO A POINT WHERE, EVEN THOUGH WE
STILL DO NOT REGARD IT AS ENTIRELY SATISFACTORY, WE
HAVE FELT ABLE TO SUPPORT IT,.
I THINK YOU CAN SEE FROM THIS PATTERN OF EVENTS
AND THE STATEMENTS OF OUR AMBASSADOR THAT THE VOTE OF
21 APRIL CAN IN NO WAY BE REGARDED AS A BASIC CHANGE OF
ATTITUDE ON MY GOVERNMENT'S PART OR A BASIC DEPARTURE FROM THAT
OF PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, FOR EXAMPLE, WE DID
ABSTAIN FROM VOTING ON A RESOLUTION ADOPTED 86-7 WITH
31 ABSTENTIONS BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON 8 DECEMBER LAST AS
REPRESENTING A FURTHER ONE-SIDED CRITICISM OF ISRAEL IN TERMS SIMILP
TO THOSE USED IN RECENT YEARS, WE ABSTAINED IN 1971 ON A
RESOLUTION IN ALMOST IDENTICAL TERMS, ON THE OCCASION OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION WE BELIEVE THAT CONSISTENT ADHERENCE
TO THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY AND OPPOSITION TO
TERRORISM DID REQUIRE SUPPORT FOR A RESOLUTION, IN ITSELF,
IN MANY WAYS, UNSATISFACTORY,
I AM NOT IN THE BUSINESS OF TELLING ISRAEL WHAT
IS FOR HER OWN GOOD, I KNOW THAT SUCH ADVICE FROM'ME WOULD
BE GRATUITOUS AND SUPERFLUOUS, I CAN ONLYSPEAK ABOUT THE,
MOST USEFUL COURSE, FOR AUSTRALIA CANNOT TAKE THE SAME
PESSIMISTIC VIEW OF THE UNITED NATIONS AS I THINK-ISRAEL TENDS
TO DO. IT IS TRUE THAT THE MIDDLE EAST HAS NOW BECOME THE 
I7.
CENTRAL STAGE OF CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE TWO GREAT POWERS
OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION, AND IT IS TRUE THAT
IN SUCH CONFRONTATIONS THE UNITED NATIONS HAS IN THE PAST
PROVED INEFFECTUAL, EVEN IMPOTENT. THERE IS NO MORE CERTAIN
WAY TO ENSURE THE CONTINUED INEFFECTIVENESS OF THE UNITED
NATIONS THAN THAT THE SMAL[ ER NATIONS OF PEACE AND FREEDOM
SHOULD DESPAIR ABSOLUTELY OF THAT , QNE WORLD BODY OF WHICH
THEY FORM A MAJORITY. THE GREATEST VICTIMS OF THE BREAKDOWN
THROUGH DESPAIR OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS WERE THE JEWISH PEOPLE.
NO NATION WOULD HAVE MORE TO LOSE THAN ISRAEL B9Y A BREAKDOWN OF
THE UNITED NATIONS.
WE HAVE AFFIRMED, AND ' WE CONTINUE TO BELIEVE, THAT
THE BEST PROSPECT FOR AN ENDURING PEACE IN THE MIIDDLE EAST
WILL FLOW FROM AN AGREEMENT FREELY ARRIVED AT BETWEEN THE
PARTIES. M'Y GOVERNMENT WILL WORK TO SECURE SUPPORTFOR
NEGOTIATIONS TOWARDS SUCH AN AGREEMENT, BOTH IN THE U..
AND IN ALL OUR DIPLOMATIC ENDEAVOURS. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE ON PRICES AND
INCOMES MATTERS AM) ALL OTHER ASPECTS
01? INFLATION
OPENING STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER
There can be today no more important reason for the
Australian Government and the State Governments to come together
than for the purpose of addressing ourselves jointly to action
against inflation. The ready response of all Premiers to the proposal
for this meeting is a measure of your concern about the prob~ lem
of inflation. That concern is fully shared by the Australian
Government and I am convinced by the Australian people.
It is, I may say, a concern which is not peculiar to
Australia. In all the advanced economics of the world, people
are expressing similar concern. Our own position is no worse
than many and a good deal better than some. But that.. as I
shall have reason to point out, is in itself cold comfort.
As you all know, the initiative for this meeting came
from the Premier of Victoria. Mr. Hlamer wrote to me on 9 April
suggesting that what was necessary to achieve effective action
against inflation was the development and implementation of a
comprehensive national prices and incomes policy. He pointed
to the division of relevant constitutional powers between the
Australian Government and the State Governments and. suggested
that a Premiers' conference should be convened in an effort to
achieve close understanding and co-operation between all of us
in this matter. We moved quickly to welcome thait initiative;
and you have responded promptly to my invitation to meet here
today " tto discuss prices and income matters and all other aspects
of inflation" 
I 2.
Let there be no doubt as to the seriousness with which
the Australian government views inflation. We have been elected
on a platform of social change. We have promised the Australian
people a program of wide-ranging and overdue reforms in the
social structure of this country. To carry out that program
is the primary objective of this government.
But we now find the possibilities for desirable social
change threatened by a potential resurgence of inflationary
pressures. We are fully alert to the distortions inflation
wreaks on the distribution of incomes; its insidious effect in
reducing the real value of savings; its unfair impact upon those
in greatest need; its adverse longer-term consequences for
growth; and, above all, the danger that if no action is taken
inflation will develop into accelerating inflation.
To the extent that inflationary pressures re-emerged it
would reduce our capacity, both in the Budget and more generally,
to bring about the social changes which are our foremost aim.
Because we have a responsibility to pursue our program to carry
out our mandate we must find effective means of tackling
inflation. We are determined that the realisation of our program
will not be thwarted by any lack of resolution in coping with
inflation, I fully recognize that political views around this table
differ. But in this matter all of us have a common interest.
Inflation adds to the problems of us all. Most certainly,
inflation runs counter to all that my Government stands for and
seeks to achieve. Now that the worst manifestations of last year's 
3.
unemployment situation are behind us, we rank inflation as the
number one economic problem. We will do all we can to bring
rising prices under control.
But inflation is an evil which permeates the economy and,
more, the society. It is widely recognised that there is no
simple solution to it-it has to be tackled across a broad front,
and by every means at the command of governments. I hardly need
to add that, in the Australian context, that means that the State
governments have a vital role to play. Mr Iamer's message and the
presence of every Premier acknowledges this fact.
I turn now to the measures which the Australian Government
has already taken, and the further measures which we propose, to
bear down against rising prices:-
SRevaluation: On 23 December within three weeks of taking
office the Australian Government revalued the Australian
dollar. The primary purpose of that measure was not to
curb rising prices but to correct a fundamental disequilibrium
in Australia's balance of payments. But a secondary purpose
was to exert a downward influence on our domestic price level.
In this respect our decision to revalue is having, and for
some time ahead, will continue to have beneficial effects on
prices in wide areas of the economy.
SReaction to Devaluation of the U. S. Dollar: It was with
these same joint considerations in mind that we determined
what reaction should be given to the announcement on
12 February that the United States dollar was to be
devalued. Our decision to sit pat and thereby
appreciate further against the U. S. dollar and any 
other currencies which followed it, wholly or in part
was in line with our decision of 23 December. As a result
of these twin decisions, import prices are now stable they
may even be falling moderately. That in itself is testimony
to the beneficial effects of the decisions in providing a
countervailing influence against rising prices. Similarly,
those firms which had previously undertaken borrowings in
foreign currency should now be enjoying actual or prospective
windfall gains as a result of the recent changes in relative
exchange rates. It is our feeling that the sense of
corporate well-being that must bring should also find some
reflection in the market-place for prices.
Inquiry into Proposed B. H. P. Price Rises: At the request
of the nation's largest industrial enterprise we set up an
inquiry into steel price rises proposed by the company. In
the result rises averaging 3 per cent occurred instead of the
rises of 7 per cent proposed. Steel prices have wide
repercussions throughout the economy. There can be no doubt
that, had steel prices risen by 7 per cent, prices generally
would be rising even faster than they now are.
Joint Parliamentary Committee on Prices: Other things being
equal, importers should now be seeing reductions in the landed
prices of their goods. We are concerned to ensure that such
reductions are passed on. They were intended to accrue, and
should accrue, not to a particular group but to the Australian
people as a whole. We look for appropriate action in that
field from the price-setters involved. And to encourage them
in that action we have referred the question to the Joint
Parliamentary Committee on Prices, as one of its first major
areas of investigation.
We have, similarly, referred to that Committee fr investigation
the question of meat prices the recent 
sharp rise in which has so greatly contributed to
the large rise in the Consumer Price Index recorded
in the March quarter.
Our attention has been drawn more recently to the
marked disparity which now exists between retail
prices of petrol in Sydney and Melbourne. My colleague,
the Minister for Minerals and Energy, has now received
a report on this matter which has been prepared for the
Australian Automobile Association. As he has said
yesterday in the House, this matter will be pursued
with vigour and to the full limit of the Government's
powers.
Liquidity Measures: As I said in my statement announcing
the revaluation of the Australian dollar, the flood
of foreign capital into Australia had resulted, by the
time we took office, in " a build-up of domestic liquidity
to a dangerously excessive level". With the economy
picking up pace there was here a tinder-box ready for
the match. It was, clearly, imperative that action be
taken to dampen any such prospective conflagration.
Simultaneously therefore with revaluation we moved to
check any further build-up of liquidity from this source
by imposing the 25 per cent deposit requirement scheme
on new borrowings abroad. Such borrowings have, to all
intents and purposes, largely ceased, 
Again, by way of follow-up to this the Treasurer
on 1 February last announced measures to broaden
the coverage of restrictions on overseas borrowing
and associated measures. The coverage of the controls
was extended to include not only formal contracts to
borrow but also indirect forms of borrowing and
transactions having a similar effect on capital inflow.
Monetary Policy: The measures I have just referred to
were of course taken within the context of our policies
towards the balance of payments and the inflow of
capital from abroad. But, as I have made clear, they
were also taken having in mind the contribution they
could make towards diminishing a major problem
the state of domestic liquidity. This brings me to
the subject of monetary policy generally.
It is I think agreed on all sides that, whatever other
steps may be necessary to check inflation, all are likely
to prove futile unless fiscal and monetary policies in
the broad are sensibly and responsibly geared to the
productive capacity of the economy. Such policies are
not, in themselves, enough: but we believe and we
are supported by all competent opinion both within
Australia and overseas that they are the essential
basis, the sine qua non, for an effective antiinflationary
strategy. 
On the monetary front, with economic activity
continuing to expand strongly, continuation of
the unduly easy stance of monetary policy would
have been fraught with dangers for the period ahead.
We have, accordingly, seen as appropriate the decision
by the Reserve Bank to make a call of one per cent to
the Statutory Reserve Deposits of the major trading
banks in April.
Similarly, in approaching the difficult decisions
involved in setting terms for the May loan recently
announced decisions in which of course you in your
capacities as members of the Loan Council have so
responsibly participated we have had to set aside
what we would have liked to do in favour of what it
was clearly necessary to do. We have, in short, met
the yields which, since the February loan, had emerged
in the market. To have attempted to maintain a lower
yield structure would have meant continuing large-scale
purchases of bonds by the Reserve Bank with consequent
expansionary effects upon the liquidity of the private
sector. In present and prospective circumstances we
were not prepared to countenance such an outcome.
In these connections I should also say that the Treasury
and the Reserve Bank have been asked to make a detailed
study of the various aspects of the regulation of the
financing activities of non-bank financial
intermediaries. 
STask Force to Review the Programs of the
Previous Government: The Government is, of
course, aware that in approaching questions of
overall economic management it will be necessary
for it to give considerable attention to fiscal
as well as to monetary policy. As a first step
in that regard I announced on 3 April last the
constitution of a special " task force", under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Coombs, to examine the programs
carried over from the previous government.
Its efforts should assist us in seeing what scope
there may be for pruning expenditures. Clearly,
it will be necessary in that or other ways to
" make room", within the totality of the public
and private demands upon the economy, for the
carrying through of our own priority programs.
SPrices Justification Machinery: My colleague the
Treasurer has, only yesterday, introduced into the
Parliament a Prices Justification Bill, I shall not
seek to detail its provisions here. However, companies
will be required to give prior indication of price
rises so that they can be examined, their effects
assessed and their justification determined by the
Tribunal set up for the purpose. The Tribunal may also
investigate cases where circumstances suggest price
reductions should have occurred, but have not, It
will also be able to inquire into and report on price
increases which companies made prior to the measures
coming into force in the hope of beating the gun, 
We shall be appointing to the Tribunal persons of the
standing and quality of those who have constituted the Trade
Practices Tribunal. In that case, of course, the members were
appointed by our predecessors. They have our respect and
confidence. Restrictive Trade Practices Legislation: As an important
aspect of its attitude towards competition policy with
the bearing that has upon the ability of price-setters to
push up prices the Government proposes to introduce
more effective legislation to deal with restrictive trade
practices. The proposed legislation will deal with contracts
in restraint of trade, monopolization, resale price
maintenance, price discrimination, anti-competitive mergers,
exclusive dealing that substantially lessens competition
or leads to a monopoly position and unfair and deceptive
practices affecting consumers. It will deal with these
provisions by directly prohibiting them instead of, as at
present, leaving them to be restrained separately after timeconsuming
enquiries. By this means the legislation will
have an early impact on the economy.
Protection Policy: Another aspect of what I have called
competition policy is to be found, of course, in the
area of protection against competition from overseas. The
Government has confirmed its support for the progressive
review of the tariff by the Tariff Board which is now
in progress. We will ensure that the further references
required to enable the Board to complete its review will go
forward. The Government proposes to establish a Protection Commission
to advise on assistance for both primary and secondary industry.
Some two months ago I asked Sir John Crawford to advise on the
functions, structure, 
membership and procedures of the proposed Commission.
Sir John's report will be available about the middle of the
year and the Government will act promptly when the report
has been received.
Action in the The Minister for the Capital Territory,
who is present with us here today, has approved the
preparation of legislation to set up a Business Leases
Review Board to examine harsh, unconscionable or unfair
rentals of commercial premises which are producing
unnecessary inflationary repercussions in the Territory.
The Minister has also approved the establishment of a
comprehensive AOC. T. Homes Insurance Scheme similar to the
successful low premium War Service Homes Insurance Scheme,
The Minister is examining proposals for a public conveyancing
service, controls over excessive advertising and similar ways
of reducing ultimate costs to the consumer. By way of
buttressing, within the Capital Territory, the actions
possible uinder the amb~ it of the Prices Justification Tribunal,
the Minister has also ap~ proved the re-activation of the Prices
Regulation Ordinance which was introduced by the Chifley
Government but which has lain dormant for some years.
* Consumer Protection: The Australian Government has been
concerned about the need for improved means of protecting
consumers against unfair trading practices. To that end
we are moving to exploit the capacities of our own
scientific and technical experts in thle formulation and
implementation of a framework of standards for consumer
products. 
11.
The Cities: We believe that inefficient cities are one
source of inflationary pressures. Present-day
inefficiencies in our major cities increase the costs
borne by city dwellers in their capacities as home-buyers,
as commuters, as rate-payers and as taxpayers more generally.
In the longer-term, the policies of the Australian
Government, designed as they will be progressively to
improve the efficiency of city living in Australia and the
welfare of our city dwellers, will contribute to
removing the inflationary pressures which these present
inefficiencies help to generate.
Proposed Establishment of Housing Standards Committee:
As a contribution to improving efficiency and reducing
costs in the housing construction industry, the
Australian Government is contemplating a forum
in which housing standards and guidelines based upon
proper technical analysis rather than upon traditional
notions will be worked out. It would involve an expert
technical unit in the Australian Department of Housing
to undertake the necessary research, development and
co-ordination, this work to be undertaken in close
association with all interested parties. We would
establish an " Australian Housing Standards Committee" for
this purpose. 
SConsultations with Management and Trade Unions:
Economic management is largely the responsibility of
the Australian Government. We accept that responsibility,
and our actions have already gone far to reflect that.
However, one group or one Government alone cannot grapple
fully with the problem. To do so requires a wider effort.
In a real sense, that is why we are here today.
I shall come shortly to the ways in which the States
can support our own efforts, But there is also the
private sector. We are planning this year to have
economic consultations, as our predecessors did, with
representatives of important areas of the economy
manufacturing, commerce, the trade unions and so on.
We will be putting it to them-to employers and
unionists alike that we look to them to support by
the exercise of restraint in their price and wage
proposals the policies which this government already has
initiated or has in hand.
Just as we will be seeking the support of the nongovernment
sector to these ends, we would hope that
you, the political leaders in your States, will take
opportunities to do the same.
What the Commonwealth Seeks of the States
I spoke earlier of Mr. Hamer's reference to the division
of relevant constitutional powers between the Australian
government and the State governments0 There is certainly scope
for complementary action by our several governments which will 
13.
bear on particular aspects of the inflationary problem. Five
months ago when we came into office we sought and obtained the
co-operation of the States in immediate measures to relieve the
unemployment situation that was concerning us all. I hope that
we can look to the State Governments for the same willing
co-operation as we address ourselves to the rather different
problems of today.
Specifically, I would now like to suggest the
following areas which appear to be promising in this respect.
Action to Complement the Australian Government's
Prices Justification Legislation. The legislation
introduced yesterday by my colleague the Treasurer
will apply only to companies whose receipts exceeded
million in the preceding financial year. That
limit has been struck to ensure that the scheme is
administratively manageable. The Australian Government's
legislation will bring under scrutiny prices charged by
the larger companies which are the " price leaders" in
respect of many products. But there are large areas
of economic activity which will not be brought under
scrutiny. That is to say, there is ample scope for
complementary action by the State Governments to
support and reinforce the impact of the Australian
Government's initiative,
Land Prices. The Australian and State Governments
need to consider, together, whether something can
be done about soaring land prices. In the longer-
14.
term, new cities will help to take pressure off
living space in and around our existing cities.
But action with a more immediate impact is also
needed. I wrote to all Premiers on 27 December 1972, seeking
co-operation on this important matter. My colleague,
the Minister for Urban and Regional Development, is
actively pursuing it. Your Governments have been
invited to introduce legislation to stabilise land
prices so that land needed later for growth and
development can be acquired at prices free from
speculation. The Australian Government is discussing
with your Governments the establishment of State Land
Commissions, to participate actively in the land
market and to increase the flow of residential land
at reasonable prices.
I know that some States are more advanced, and more
willing to advance, in these directions than are
other States. I know too that the problems vary in
intensity and nature as between States. We hope that
all States will be prepared to make their contribution
to the prime objective of giving Australian families
access to land at fair prices.
Building Costs. There are various possible ways in
which State Governments might act to check the serious
upward spiral in building costs and particularly,
of course, the costs of housing construction. 
As the Treasury said yesterday in its published
Round-up of Economic Statistics, the demands being
made upon the housing sector are now clearly
excessive. As a result, house-building is under
severe strain from lack of men and materials.
Office-building is also going on apace especially
in the central business districts of the big cities
and there is some evidence of a prospective glut in
this sector. Some reduction in activity in officebuilding
would of course release resources and this
could marginally ease the problems in the housing
sector. We recognise, of course, that the scope for
transferring the particular resources concerned is
limited and it would in any case no doubt take some
time before any significant relief could be hoped for.
But the Government believes that the State Governments
particularly those in whose States most of the large
office projects are going forward should at least
examine the possibilities. Is there a glut? Will
there be a glut? What could be gained for housing if
office building were restrained? And what means of
restraint are available? Surely these are matters which
are worthy of some examination by State Governments in
co-operation with us.
As a separate matter, I have been personally disappointed
in the slow and reluctant acceptance by some of the
States of the Australian Model Uniform Building Code
which you yourselves have worked out and I sincerely
hope that those States which have not so far adopted it
will do so. I would propose to invite each Premier to nominate 
a representative or representatives to engage in the
work of the contemplated Australian Housing Standards
Committee. We shall provide more details in direct
ministerial contacts.
Restrictive Trade Practices. I referred earlier to the
Australian Government's proposal to introduce more
effective legislation to deal with restrictive trade
practices. These practices are rife in Australia and
their very purpose is usually to keep prices up. They
serve to aggravate inflationary trends and the need for
effective legislation to control them is pressing.
The Australian Government recognizes that the existing
Restrictive Trade Practices Act is not effective for
this purpose. More effective legislation is being
prepared and it will be introduced into the Australian
Parliament as soon as possible, But there will not be
sufficient constitutional power to permit the legislation
to cover the whole field of restrictive trade practices.
The legislation will depend, in the main, on the
corporations power as that power was construed by the
High Court in the Concrete Pipes case. There are still
many uncertainties as to the scope of this power and
it is plainly limited in a number of respects. For
example, many trade practices, particularly those
relating to services, do not involve corporations.
This is, I believe, an area where a co-operative
effect by the Australian and the State Governments can
and should be made. Some states have already indicated 
17.
a willingness to co-operate by enacting legislation
referring to the Australian Parliament the necessary
power to deal with those trade practices that are at
present beyond its reach. We are grateful for their
indications of willingness to co-operate and propose
to take the matter up with them very soon now that
the nature of our own proposed legislation is almost
settled. I hope th. at other States will f6llow suit
and make it possible for the Australian Parliament
to deal effectively with the whole range of these
undesirable practices. The best method of co-operation
in regard to this matter would be a reference of power
similar to the one that was effected by Tasmania in
1966. A State that was not prepared to refer power
could assist by enacting legislation complementing
that of the Australian Parliament. I would hope that
this course would also be seriously considered.
Consumer Protection. I have already referred to our
own intentions in this field. But if effective action
is to be taken Australia-wide it will need the active
support and co-operation of the States. In that
context, I suggest that the Premiers might ask their
appropriate Ministers to meet with the Australian
Minister of Science to discuss ways of arriving at
uniform standards for consumer products and ensuring
that those standards are observed.
Measures of this kind make a direct contribution to
community welfare; but in the present context we
also see them as assisting competitive market forces
B P 
18.
to reduce the scope for irresponsible pricing.
0 a 0 0 a 0
Finally, a word on incomes. Some take the position
that the be-all and end-all of anti-inflationary policies is
to fulminate against wage rises. That is not our position.
On the contrary, we have moved to correct, in the areas under
our own control, some evident anomalies and injustices. We
have acted to increase social service payments to those who
have been most cruelly harmed by inflation. We make no apology
for acting quickly to honour our election pledges in these
fields. We are happy that in Tuesday's decision the
Arbitration Commission has recognized the particular needs of
low wage earners in giving them a substantial rise from the
unrealistically low levels of the recent past. The Government
does not take any rigid and doctrinaire position on these matters
and our attitude to future wage claims, in National Wage Cases
and elsewhere, will pay full regard to all of the circumstances,
social and economic, which prevail at the time.
Tuesday's award was, of course, a large one, and it
will add substantially to costs. With productivity rising as
the output of the economy picks up, the greater part of industry
should be well-placed at present largely to absorb these
increased costs. I now invite the Premiers, in turn, to put forward
their own proposals and their views on the suggestions I have
made. We will not solve everything in one day. But we can
make progress in identifying areas where the national and State
Governments can act together against a problem which, as I began
by saying, confronts us all. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM
TO THE FIRST COMMIONWEALTH CONFERENCE
OF THE AMALGAMATED METALWORKERS?
UNION MUSICIANS' CLUB, 94 CHALMERS
STREET, SYDNEY, ' 11 MAY 1973
UNIONS AN]) THE GOVERNMENT
This conference is the culmination of an historic process of
change within the metal trades unions. It is alsot I hope, the forerunner
of a similar process of change throughout the whole trade union
movement. The purpose of this change is to produce unions that are
more effective, more efficient and more democratic. What you have
achieved will have a far-reaching impact on the well-being of every
Australian worker and his family. Its importance cannot be overestimated.
The Amalgamated Metalworkerst Union is indeed ahead of its
time. It has put into effect, or is actively pursuing, many of the aims
and reforms embodied in the industrial legislation passed by the House
of Representatives this week. Your union has set the pace, and set an
example, for the rest of Australia. You are not only the biggest union
in Australia as a result of your recent amalgamation: you are among the
most democratic in your internal administration. It is a remarkable fact
that of the 144 delegates to your first Commonwealth conference this
week, 85% have come direct from the work-bench. You have demonstrated
that the amalgamation of unions, and the concentration of industrial
strength in larger organisations, can be achieved without creating an
unwieldy bureaucracy or diminishing the rights of individual members.
The emphasis you have always placed on participatory democracy, on
industrial safety, on the importance of industrial agreements, on trade
union education, is reflected in the legislation introduced in the
national Parliament by my colleague, the Minister for Labour, and passed
this week. The success with which you have tackled these matters augurs
well for the success of our bill. In the face of much-sitfident clamour
from our opponents, you have shown what can be done.
Today I want to announce some further plans of the Government
to improve the rights and conditions of trade unionists and promote
better industrial relations in Australia. But first let me deal with
some of the broad principles underlying our approach to industrial
matters, This year has been on the whole a harmonious one in industrial
relations. There has been no major or prolonged industrial stoppage,
and the general morale within the trade union movement is high.
I do not, of course, want to downgrade your legitimate
grievances or fears. Many of them are shared by the Government, and
I shall have more to say about that later0 But you will all remember
what our opponents were saying before the last election. There were
all sorts of calamity-howlers predicting strife and dissention, union
blackmail9 industrial chaos and the breakdown of law and order if Labor
achieved power0 I hardly need to tell you how baseless and puerile these
statements look now0 Today we have a new understanding and a new trust
between the Government and the unions. We want to ensure that the same
understanding and trust prevail between unions and employersw 
-2-
That indeed is the purpose of our recent conciliation and
arbitration legislation. There can be no trust or understanding in
industry if one side feels itself to be aggrieved or the victim of
discrimination,. There can be no trust or goodwill if union officials
are open to civil prosecution for upholding their members' interests.
There can be no trust or goodwill if the law makes a criminal of the
working man who chooses to withdraw his labour,. There can be no trust
or goodwill if compulsory arbitration takes precedence over direct and
amicable conciliation and discussion between the parties to a dispute.
All these aspects of the old law are being removed. There is no need
for me to rehearse the provisions of our legislation, which must be
famil~ iar to you all. I shall, however, mention our proposals on union
amalgamation, since they are closely relevant to what your own union has
been doing. We give a high priority to efforts to encourage amalIgamations.
Even the Opposition supports amalgamation in principle, though they
capitulated last year to the DLP's opposition to amalgamations when
industrial legislation was before the Parliament. The Opposition had
a chance to demonstrate this week that it was free of the shackles of
the DLP by supporting our amalgamation proposal. They failed to do so,
Yet we all know the benefits that amalgamations can bring. They can
strengthen the negotiating power of unions and equip them for conditions
of modern industrial bargaining between ever-growing corporations and
large Government employers. It is absurd that we should have mor+! than
305 separate trade unions in Australia with half of them having fi. wer
than * 1,000 members and only 14 with a membership of more than 50,000.
In West Germany, with a much larger population, and with one of the
lowest rates of industrial stoppages in Europe, there are only 16
unions. Their Metal Workerst Union has more than 2 million members.
It, is just as important that unions should be strong enough to withstand
the power of big corporations as it is that Governments should be strong
enough to withstand the same pressures
The benefits of amalgamation have been demonstrated by your own
union, We are determined that the opportunity for amalgamation should be
cast as widely as possible so that smaller unions, in particular, will
be able to avail themselves of this reform if they want it. In this way
they can enjoy savings in administrative costs and the elimination of
waste and duplicated work. They can afford higher salaries for their
officials, and draw their officials from a greater poo. of talent that
a small union can offer.. They would be able to afford libraries,, research
staff and independent economic and legal advice which may now be beyond
their resources,* Let me quote what Mr. Lynch, the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition, said about anion amalgamations in Melbourne on 2 March 1972:
" It is fair to say that provided the membership of industrial organisations
does not lose effective control as a result of amalgamations, there are
many advantages which can accrue from amalgamation. For instance, there
are some 300 unions in Australia. Most of them are very small,. It could
facilitate the functioning of the arbitration system and relations
generally between employers and unions if this number of unions decreased'.
I know of situations in which employers have sat across the table with no
fewer than 15 unions in relation to one issue. Government departments
have had this experiencelw" 0 .0 
-3-
It is good to know there is on Opposition member on our side,
who supports what your union has been doing.. From what I heart they are
even talking now of amalgamations among the numerous Opposition parties.
That applies to the DLP and the Country Party. The Country Party and the
Liberal Party have not yet decided whether to amalgamate or not.. They
have only just settled the question of who is the second most important
person in the Opposition,~ The example of the Metal Workorst Union should
commend itself to them. I suppose there is always a risk in the eyes of
the DLP that an amalgamated Opposition would fall under Communist control.
The other thing I should like to stress about our industrial
legislation is that we have a clear public mandate for it. Our proposals
were fiibmly stated in my policy speech for -the House of Representatives
election. They were publicly determined by the Federal Conference of
the Australian Labor Party in Launceston in 1971. They have been given
wide publicity. Mr. Cameron, the Minister for Labour, has expounded
and explained them fully in speeches throughout Australia, In these
circumstances we cannot and will not tolerate interference with our
proposals from the Senate. In my press conference this week I made it
clear and I state it again that the rejection of these proposals
would have to be studied in the context of the provisions of the
Constitution for a double dissolutioi. On a bill of substance such as
this, we would not brook interference with our publicly-en~ lorsed program
to promote industrial harmony and to remove injustices against the
working people who comprise the majority of our population.
There is another important area in which the national Government
can protect the interests of the working man. That is in the control
of prices and inflation. I spoke earlier of what I know to be your
legitimate grievances and fears and the fear of unjustified price
rises is the foremost of these fears. Yesterday I attended a conference
of the Premiers in Canberrat a conference called on the initiative of
the Victorian Premier, at which I put forward a series of proposals
designed to combat inflation in co-operation with the States. The
Australian Government has already taken a number of measures, including
revaluation of the dollar and the introduction of prices justification
machinery, in a determined program to keep prices down,. But direct
control of prices can, if necessary, only be taken as part of a national
plan in which the State Governments co-operate fully. They alone have
the powers. There is a powerful body of opinion which believes that
inflationary tendencies can be checked only be restraint on incomes, or
at least by means of a combined prices and incomes policy,. That view
was put to yesterdayfs conference by three conservative State Governments.
On the question of incomes I had this to say to Premiers in my opening
statement, and I quote:
" Some take the position that the be-all and end-all of antiinflationary
policies is to fulminate against wage rises. That is not
our position. On the contrary, we have moved to correct, in the areas
under our own control, some evident anomalies and injustices. We have
acted to increase social service payments to those-who have been most
cruelly harmed by inflation. We make no apology for acting quickly to
honour our election pledges in these fields&gt;. 0 
-4-
We are happy that in Tuesday's aecision the Arbitration
Commission has recognised the particular needs of low wage earners in
giving them a substantial rise from the unrealistically low levels of
the recent past. The Government does not take a rigid and doctrinaire
position on the-se matters and our attitude to future wage claims, in
National Wage Cases and elsewhere, will pay full regard to all of the
circumstances, social and economict which prevail at the time."
Let me tell you of some of the measures we contemplate to
encourage a more informed and more efficient trade union movement and to
improve working conditions in industry..
First, accidents. We are determined to reduce the incidence
of industrial accidents and occupational disease. We have announced
new plans for compensation but our prime concern is to prevent
accidents rather than alleviate their effects. The Government will draw
up a new uniform industrial safety code to apply throughout Government
departments and instrumentalities and in all establishments in the A. C. T.
With proper precautions accidents can be prevented. This has been clearly
demonstrated by BHP, where there has been a 93 percent reduction in
accidents in the past 15 years and this in an industry, iron and steel,
which must be ranked among the most dangerous.
Second, supervision. We are anxious that safety conditions
and all the provisions of industrial awards should be more effectively
supervised. We propose * to appoint another 100 arbitration inspectors
to police awards and safety standards,. One-third of them will be tradeunionists
with a working knowledge of their industries.
Third, trade union education. A well-educated and efficient
trade union leadership is crucial to good industrial relations. Your
union has taken the lead in this field by setting up its own training
schools. Unions should have have to dissipate their resources in this
way,. Such training should be a Government responsibility like all other
forms of education. My Government will finance a national training
college with a centre in each capital city to train unionists and offer
overseas study scholarships to those with special talents.
Fourth, apprenticeship. The Government is concerned at the
failure of some employers to engage sufficient apprentices to meet their
needs. This was possible because, under old immigration laws, employers
were content to bring in tradesmen from overseas while neglecting the
training of our own workmen. The Department of Labour is studying the
possibility of introducing one year's " block training" of apprentices,
instead of obliging them to spread their technical education
intermittently over four years. The year of " block training" wouldt if
implemented, be followed by three years' apprenticeship on the job,
making a total of four years altogether,.
We believe these measures will contribute further to the wellbeing
of workers and to enlightened and harmonious industrial relations.
No Government has a greater interest than mine in preserving and strengthening
the foundations of industrial peace in this country. No union
has a greater interest than yours in ensuring the success of these
endeavours. I am confident that Government and unions can work
together as they have in the past for a more just and prosperous
society. 



PACIFIC BASIN ECONOMIC COUN~ hCILKEY-
NOTE ADDRESS BY THE PRIME
MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, HON. E. G.
WHITLAM CHEVRON HOTEL, SYDNEY
14 M4AY, 1973
Since taking office just over five months ago the new
Australian Government has acted over a wide range of matters firmly
directed -towards the new realities, new prospects and new hopes for
this vast Pacific region.
My first visit overseas, as Prime Minister was to New
Zealand, in January. In February I visited Papua New Guinea and
Indonesia. Last month I led the Australian delegation to the South
Pacific Forum in Apia, Western Samoa. On my way to London after the
Forum I had a very long and, as you would expect, stimulating discussion
with the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Trudeau, I9 shall be in North
America again in August for the Commonwealth Heads of Government
meeting and in Japan for the Annual Ministerial' meeting in October.
We moved immediately to normalise relations with the most populous
Pacific power the People's Republic of China. We have been acting
in very close co-operation with our South Pacific partners, particularly
New Zealand, in opposition to French nuclear testing in the Pacific.
President Nixon said last year that 1973 would be the year
of Europe. For us, however, it is very much the year of the Pacific.
This is inevitably and'naturally so. It is the reflection not only
of geographical realities but of the political, diplomatic and economic
realities in the region.
Much has been said and wvritten about the Government's style
and approach. ' It is true that, in many matters, we hive moved with
a speed which was not, one might say, altogether characteristic of
Governments in Australia over the last few years. Nothing we have
done, however, in these matters was not absolutely and precisely
predictable by anybody who had taken the trouble to look at the
considered and consistent policies of the Party which now forms the
Australian Government. Interestingly enough, the very decision which
is held in some quarters to represent the sharpest departure the
recognition of the People's Republic is the very one on which failure
to move rapidly would have put us most obviously out of step with the
other nations represented in the Pacific Basin Economic Council. All
of ust with the exception of the United States, now recognise China
on very much the same terms; and the United States is moving as
rapidly towards normalisation as the extraordinary complexity of power
relations alow. I wish that Australia could have shown the leadership
and foresight of Canada and thereby been entitled to the lasting
gratitude of nations, not least the United States herself, in helping
to restore reason and reality to the Westts relations with China0 In
the event we did nothing at all radical; we merely ratified reality.
The essence of that realiity in our region is that the
conflict of ideologies must now give way to the rational development,
use and conservation-of the region's human and physical resources.
The intractable nature of the war in Indochina sprang partly from the
fact that as far as the foreign belligerents were concerned it had no
identifiable goals in terms of the possession of resources, or the 
-2-
expansion of trade, or the protection of lines of communication.
It was just precisely that consciousness of unselfishness misplaced
an4 misjudged as we now see that idealism to have been which drew
the United States deeper and deeper into a conflict from which she
could draw no material advantage. We need in this region an ideological
holiday as far as our trade and diplomatic relations are concerned. This
does not mean that we are ideologically indifferent or that there are
no differences. The nations represented on this Council are not only
all democracies but form one of the world's few significant democratic
groupings. Democracy is no longer automatically taken as the only
acceptable form of government. If, however, it is no longer appropriate
to be crusaders it is absurd to believe the democracies are under seige0
In all the time that we have been agonising over the political
future of Indochina; in all the time that we have been pre-. occupied with
the mistaken idea that Indochina was the appropriate ideological
battleground between East and West, between China and the United States;
in all the time that we have been wasting human and natural resources in
pursuit of an ideological pre-occupation, we have ignored the -real
nature of the growing challenge to civilisation. It is a challenge
which knows no ideological bias. The basic question now facing mankind
is not whether communism or democracy will prevail but whether
civilisation as now constituted can long endure the pressure and demands
of population upon resources. We have created for ourselves in less
than a century a civilisation of unparalleled complexi ty, unparalleled
splendour yet unparalleled wastefulness. We make in a . year greater
demands upon this earthi's resources than any entire generation ever
did before. We are the first civilisation in human history whose day
to dlay existence depends on the consumption of resources which can
never be replaced. In war, in any given day in Indochina we would
consume more of the world's irreplaceable material than all the battles
from Rameses to Napoleon combined. In peace, in day to day livin. S the
-handful of nations represented on this Council would use more fuel
and energy in a year than the whole of Europe required to carry through
the industrial revolution in the century after Napoleon.
It is true that countries like ours which have all experienced
and contributed to the growing wonders of modern technology tend to
be supremely optimistic; technology always finds the answer we hope.
Yet we are sporting with fate if we allow sheer optimism to overcome
reason in the face of one most palpable fact and that is, the world's
resources of fuel and energy are finite and irreplaceable. A
civilisation, and the nations composing that civillisation, which will
not face that simple fact and combine to plan modifications i~ n its
life-style to allow for this fact will not long endure.
Nations have traditionally met their need for resources by
national expansion, usually by war. In the case of the United States,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand, we expanded by dispossessing the
indigenous peoples. These methods are no longer available, even if
they were remotely acceptable. 
-3-
Our great danger now is that in the competition for access
to the worldts resources we could stumble into the supreme folly of
war for the possession of resources. I say " the supreme folly" because
the plain fact is that any war for resources would use more resources
in the prosecution of that war than could ever have conceiLvably been
obtained by the victorious power in such a war. I want to emphasise
this point because our pre-occupation with ideological conflicts
particularly in South East Asia, and our determination to avoi~ d
nuclear war have tended to obscure the equal folly and equal dangers
to the survival of civilisation posed by traditional wars over resourcest
even if they were waged by so-called conventional means. I might
illustrate this point by reference to Japan and I had the honour * to
make this observation to the Crown Prince of Japan when he was with
us in Canberra last week. The really important and enduring thing
about the " economic miracle" of modern Japan is the hope it contains
for'-the peace of the region and the world. Japan, unique in so many
ways in world history, unique in so many things in world civilisation,
is unique in nothing so great and momentous as this: That she intends
to be the worldts first great economic power to base her claim to
fair and adequate * access to the raw materials and oierseas markets her
industry requires without military threats or force. This is the
" 1new course". o I believe that Japan, her people and her leaders, will
hold to the " new course".* I have stated that belief not only here,
not only in Tokyo but indeed in Peking.
We take reassurance from the fact that Japan has renounced
nuclear weapons. The " new course" ls however, I believe rests not only
upon Japan's recognition of the supreme and final folly of a nuclear
war; it is not just based on her own terrible and unique o rdeal; nor
does the renunciation of war only rest upon a recognition that Japan
is physically and economically so utterly vulnerable to nuclear war.*
Even if it could be limited to non-nuclear weapons, a so-called conventional.
war for the control. of resources would be the ultimate act of
human folly and unreason. Great industrial societies, of which Japan
is already the third, are facing crises in the availability of traditional
fuels and many forms of raw material; yet a war over resources,
particularly fuels, involving any of the great powers would itself
entirely consume the very resources being fought over. These
considerations reinforce the need for a " new course" not just by Japan
but by all the powers.
The great relevance of these matters to the nations represented
in this Council is that we are all great users of resources and great
producers of resourcest living in a region of tremendous inequalities
in both the use and possession of resources.
We depend very much on each other as developed countries and
the developing countries in our region depend very much upon us. This
Council is necessarily and properly mainly concerned with commercial
and investment problems, and opportunities between the member countries
and other countries in the region. At any time since the formation of
this Council in 1967 the emphasis in its deliberations would properly
have been on. the expansion of trade between our-member nations. This
is still your principal concern as businessmen and investors. But may 
-4-
I suggest that for the remainder of this centure no international
forum, whether at the governmental, official, entrepeneurial or
scientific level, can ignore this basic problem of world resources.
It is particularly appropriate that I raise this matter with you.
Some of you come from tlhse two great nations of the United States and
Japan to provide us with our most important markets and we are, of
course, one of the worldts great possessors of so many of the resources
for which demand threatens to outpace supply. Increasingly, the
relations between Australia and Japan, Australia and the United States,
and the relations between Canada and the United States will turn on
the question of the use and share of resources. My own Government has
already made a number of decisions about the future use and ownership
and development of Australian mineral and energy resources. These
primarily are decisions related to national considerations to
Australian aspirations about her own future and her own rights in the
use of her own resources. We do, however, recognise our wider
responsibilities to our region and to civilisation. As the fortunate
possessor of very great resources we want to play our part in
contributing to the prosperity of the region and of the civilisation.
It can't be done if the nations indulge in a catch-as-catch-can race
for resources; it can't be done if corporations conduct their business
operations with an eye only to the balance sheet; it can't be done if
governments are not prepared to co-operate with each other and with
business to develop rational and internationally responsible policies
on the future use of resources. We have to make a start now on
developing such policies for if we do not it's quite plain that the
future of the technological civilisation we here represent, for all
its splendours, for all its miraculous achievements, is likely to be
nasty, brutish and short. 0 0
fte 



SPEECH BY THE BRINE MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT A VICTORIAN
STATE ELECTION MEETING ST. KILDA
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE, 16 MAY 1973
When I asked the people of Australia to elect a Labor
Government on 2 December I said that we would need the help of all
Australians the best Australians in carrying out our mandate.
I still need that help. A vote for Labor a vote for
Clyde Holding on Saturday is one way of giving that help, that
support, We need that support.
We have to realise that we can never take anything for
granted: we have to realise that our opponents are bitterly
resentful about what happened last December0
The Liberal Party today is just the party of revenge0
They will miss no opportunity to take that revenge to take it
on the Labor Party, to take it on the Australian people0
It's incredible but true that this rabble, this mish-mash
of vested interests, factions, bitter old men and frustrated young
ones, this motley crew of incompetents still believe themselves to
be our natural heaven-born rulers0
They regard the verdict of 2 December as an aberration0 They
like to think that the Labor Government is only an interregnum.
Because of this attitude they will use every available
source of power to break the will of the Government and frustrate
the will of the people, to dilute the mandate you gave us0 They
must not succeed0 They hold power in the Senate and in the three
eastern States. The reactionary majority in the Senate will be looking to
Victoria next Saturday for encouragement for their disruption and
obstruction0 The Senate reflects the state of public opinion of three
and six years ago but that means nothing to these arrogant, fearful
men, It does not matter to them that they are flying in the face
of the clear and fresh expression of the will of the people: their
Withers are unrung.
The Senate is not being asked to ratify anything that was
not clearly spelled out in the Policy Speech. It was a clear precise
document0 We received a clear, precise mandate.
The House of Representatives this session will be putting
through 120 Bills all of them the legislative expression of the
Policy Speech0 
-2-
Unless our opponents in the Senate come to their senses,
unless they recognise what democracy is all about they will reduce
our legislative program to ruins.
Who will suffer thereby? It won't just be me, it won't just
be the Labor Partyø The main victims will be the people of Australia,
the parliamentary system.
Not the least important aspect of our victory was to restore
faith in the parliamentary system to restore faith in the possibility
of change through Parliament.
Are those hopes, the hopes particularly of the new generation,
to be shattered on the rock of the wilfulness and bitterness of a
handful of Senators? We won't have a bar of it. The business of
Government can go on.
A great number of things can be done outside Parliament.
Indeed we showed that, in the early days of our Government. But we
were scrupulous to do nothing by extra parliamentary means for which
we did not have a clear and commanding instruction from the people.
But when a Government is forced, deeply against its own will
and inclination, to carry on the people's business by by-passing
Parliament, it's unhealthy for the Government, for the Parliament and
for the nation. We are not going to be forced into that position.
This country is still paying a heavy price for the opportunism
of Sir Robert Menzies in throwing the two Houses of Parliament out of
kilter in 1962.
As a result, since I became Deputy Leader just 13 years ago
I have had-to fight 8 national campaigns. But I don't suppose we can
blame Sir Robert Menzies for taking his chance when he saw it in 1963.
Nothing would give me greater pleasure personally and politically
to end this situation where the Government of Australia is to be
conducted in an atmosphere of perpetual electioneering.
I hope on Saturday the people of Australia will recall
recalcitrant, reacitionary Senators to their duty and call them to their
senses, I hope they will say on Saturday that they were deadly
serious about what they did last December and that they will insist
that the program of which we were elected is pushed through.
And it is not only the Senators: every vested interest who
feels in some way endangered or disadvantaged by our drive towards a
decent Australia is sweating on these elections. o / 3 
3-
I won't say anything here about the strutting, stunting
Premier of Queensland Mr. 19%. ( 1 am referring to his electoral
support, not any other condition, not his dividends,,) All I can say
is I wish he would give Queensland and Australia a chance.
These are the people who rant and posture about our
electoral reforms0 Yet the Country Party Premier of Queensland has the
nerve to claim a popular mandate with 19% of the vote in that State.
The parties that tolerate that sort of electoral monstrosity
have the gall to preach to the Australian people about electoral
gerrymanders. The only electoral gerrymanders that survive in this country
were engineered by Labor's opponents.
They kept Labor out of office in South Australia for years
despite the will of the people. They still keep Labor out of office
in Queensland. They won't be allowed to deny Labor voters a fair and equal
chance in the national elections0
Our electoral reforms will ensure that no one group of the
population has an electoral advantage over any other. We dont believe
that country votes should be worth more than city votes or vice versa.
We are not going to allow privilege and social discrimination
to be permanently enshrined on our electoral laws.
Our electoral bill goes to the root of our parliamentary
democracy. Our electoral bill will bring nearer the only fair and
just basis for a voting system the principle of one vote, one value0
Who can trust the Liberals and their friends when it comes to
electoral reforms? They talked for years about votes for 18 year olds.
Mr. Gorton promised votes for 18 year olds at the last elections.
The Liberals broke that promise0 They were frightened of the
young people's vote.
Labor has legislated to give 18 year olds the vote. It was
left to my Government to carry through the reform promised by our
predecessors. 0
Our opponents are frightened of what' Labor can do with the
people's support. We have this extraordinary spectacle of the A. M. A. so-called
" fighting fund" a million and a half dollars to fight against our
health program0 A million and a half dollars five or six times the amount
spent by any of the parties in the last campaign. And for what?
V c*/ 
-4-
To propagandise against a program which was at the very
heart of our policy in three national elections.
If any one issue was responsible for the tremendous gains
we made in 1969 the election which laid the foundations for victory
in 1972 it was our health program.
Nor all the misrepresentation of the not all their
millions, not all their false and misleading propaganda is going to
prevent us implementing our pledge to the people and is going to
prevent the Australian people from having a decent, efficient, just
health scheme. These are principally Federal issues but politics in
Australia is indivisible, certainly as far as the Australian Labor
Party is concerned. This is the third great meeting I have addressed in this
campaign in Victoria.
I know Mr. Snedden is much too busy to campaign in his home
State. But I have been glad to support Clyde Holding. I have b Tf
glad to indicate by my presence and by my wife's presence here
tonight the indivisibility of the Labor Party and the Labor program.
This is the first State election in this State since the
Victorian branch of our party was reconstructed and reformed in 1970.
Great progress has been made by our party in Victoria and
Clyde Holding has been in the forefront of that progress.
Victoria needs a young, contemporary and progressive leader.
Clyde Holding is such a leader.
Clyde Holding's actions in 1970 were as significant as those
of anyone in making Victoria the most successful branch of the Labor
Party in this country.
You have seen what our reforms achieved last December. The
biggest improvement in Laborts vote in any State occurred in Victoria.
The same progress can be achieved in the elections next Saturday..
I ask your support for Clyde Holding and the Labor Party
on Saturday, not just because they offer a better way for Victoria
but because I want a demonstration here in Victoria that the
irresponsibility and selfishness of our opponents in Canberra will
not go unheeded or unpunished.
A strong Labor showing on Saturday will give them the
warning they need. 0 0 000 0O * 0 a 0 0 0 e 0 0a 0 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM
AT THE OPENING OF A NATIONAL SEMINAR ON ABORIGINAL ARTS AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
21 MAY 1973
ABORIGINAL ARTS
There could be no more appropriate meeting place for this
seminar than the Coombs Lecture Theatre of this university. I do not
need to tell you of the dedicated and untiring service Dr. Coombs has
given to both the arts and the Aboriginal people of this country.
This seminar brings together two o~ f the great causes to which he has
devoted much of his distinguished career as an Australian public
servant. I pay tribute to his energy, his zeal and his humanity.
There can be no qualification about my Government's
commitment to the cause of the Aboriginal people. We are determined
that the long record of injustice, repression, neglect, the record
that has marked our treatment of the Aboriginal people for two
centuries of white civilisation on this continent, will be brought
to an end. Let there be no mistaking our sincerity. Above ally let
there be no mistaking our motives. Our commitment to the Aboriginal
people is no token gesture to modish theories, no easy device to
improve the " image" of white Australia overseas, no comfortable sop
to world opinion. We regard the Aboriginals' rights and dignity as
more important than the white mants reputation. I repeat what I said
in my policy speech last Nov-ember: " The Aborigines are a responsibility
we cannot escape, cannot share, cannot shuffle off." In 1967 the
Australian people, by an overw~ 1elming majority at a referendum,
gave the national Government an overriding responsibility for the
welfare of the Aboriginal people. Nothing was done to implement
that responsibility in any way that would not have been possible
before that referendum was passed. We will accept that responsibility;
we regard it as a sacred trust.
The Labor Government has many plans and many ambitions for
the Australian people. But if there is one ambition-we place above all
others, if there is one achievement for which I hope we will be remembered,
if there is one cause for which I hope future historians will salute
us, it is this: That the Government I lead removed a stain from our
national honour and gave justice and equality to the Aboriginal people.
My Government intends to restore to the Aboriginal people
of Australia the power to make their own decisions about their way of
life within the Australian community. We know that most Aboriginal
Australians are proud of their heritage, of their long history and
of the traditions and culture which have been handed down to them.
We know that most of them, in all parts of Australia, want to preserve
their identity as distinctive groups within an Australian society which
respe-cts and honours that identity. 
-2-
Accordingly we see this seminar as an important expression
of the Government's intention. It has been arranged by the newlyestablished
Board for Aboriginal Arts within the Australian Council
for the Arts. This Board is composed exclusively of Aborigines and
is presided over by your chairman, Mr. Dick Roughsey. That board has
decided who was to be invited to participate in the seminar. That board
will determine the conduct of the seminarts proceedings. I am glad to
see that the majority of those present are themselves Aborigines and
that those who are not, are men and women of goodwill whose knowledge
and experience will be of value in your deliberations0 Important among
these are distinguished repres-entatives of ethnic groups from New
Zealand, the United State-s and Africa, to whom I extend a special welcome.
We expect that the work of the seminar will guide the Aboriginal.
Arts Board in tbe policies it will develop. My Government intends that
the Board will receive greatly increased financial resources so that it
can do its work effectively.
The Board will be concerned to support and stimulate the
traditional arts of the Aboriginal people. Gradually, white Australians
have become aware of the richness'-and diversity of these arts of the
bark paintings, the rock carvings and paintings, of the mimey the dancing
and the music of the dramatic presentation of traditional myths and
stories, of the great song cycles which celebrate the -adventures of
totemic ancestors in the dream-time. What has tended to be forgotten
is that these examples of the cultural heritage of the Aboriginal
people have their source in, and derive their inspiration from, the
deeply spiritual ceremonial which is of the essence of the Aboriginal
way. I hope your seminar will explore this relationship so that the
Boardts support may be given in ways which respect and enrich the
ceremonial foundations as well as the works of the artists which spring
from it. It has been fashionable to regard Aboriginal arts as a
rigidly unchanging repetition of forms laid down in times immemorial.
I believe this is a mistake. There is ample evidence of the influence
of change in subject matter, in materials, in style and purpose0
Truly it is an ordered change within a stable but developing tradition.
I do not think we should regard Aboriginal arts as a museum piece, but
rather as a vigorous, expression of the vitality of the Aboriginal way,
changing as it will from the effects of outside influences and from its
own internal vitality. Authenticity depends upon the arts still being
rooted in2 and enlivened by, the true spirit of the Aborigipal people
rather than by adherence to unchanging forms.
There are many Aboriginal Australians whose links with the
traditions of their ancestors have been broken or become tenuous. Many
live in tow ns and cities, facing the problems of isolation, of prejudice,
and a multitude of social and economic handicaps. For them, the arts
will take much from white society, and from other racial groups in style
and technique. They will be seen in part as a means whereby urban
Aborigines are frequently an expression of protest and that they learn
much from protest in s'imilar forms from minorities the world over. Such 
-3-
social protest is a proper purpose of the arts and I hope that the
Aboriginal Arts Board will strengthen the capacity of urban communities
to make their voices heard. Artists are not only those who see and
feel most intensely the agonies, the sorrows and the hopes of their own
people: They are those who can bring to others the willingness and
capacity to comprehend and share these emotions. I have been struck
by the distinctively Aboriginal style which is emerging in the writing,
the theatre, the visual arts of urban Aboriginal artists. I hope this
style will be brought to full flower in the coming years.
Mr. Roughsey, you and your fellows here in this seminar have
before you an exciting task and as historic opportunity. I wish Syou
well in your deliberations. I pledge the support of the Australian
Government for the plans which I am sure will emerge from them.
I have much pleasure in declaring open this National Seminar
on Aboriginal Arts. 0 0 0 @ e.. aee a 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P..
AT THE M. T. I. A. SEMINAR HELD IN MELBOURNE ON
THURSDAY, 21 JUNE. 1973
In accepting your invitation, I must say I had some
reservations about your promotional brochure.
It says: " If you open this folder, you are in for
a shock." Well, nobody resists that sort of come-on; so I did
open it. And what do I find?
A splendid likeness and the words " Keynote E. G. Whitlam,
Prime Minister of Australia."
And indeed, it is not made quite clear in your promotion
whether the Seminar is to discuss future shock according to
Professor Toffler or under the Whitlam Government.
I know that my colleagues and I have, from time to time,
been reported as saying or doing things which may have surprised
you or even shocked you. I think it was inevitable, after 23
years, that this would be so; and, of course we Labor men crude,
rough, unpolished as we are do not have that finesse and elegance
and suavity that you natural~ ly came to expect from our predecessors,
the men born to rule. So you will have to bear with us if at times
we seem to fall short of those sophisticated standards of former
days. You will pardon me, however, if I say that I find it just
a little frustrating to discover that plain speaking from an
Australian Prime Minister is so often resented. Is there a
country in the world where straightforward statements are so
often regarded as arrogant or indiscreet or even, as I find in
the Age this week, egocentric? I would have thought it just a
matter of stating the truth when asked. Indeed, I think our
problem in Australia is not so much one of future shock, but
recovering from past bromides.
So I do see it as part of my duties to administer from
time to time a little shock treatment; of course I shall be
careful to see it doesn't become aversion therapy.
Today, however, I am going to do the responsible, the
discreet, the Prime Ministerial thing: I am going to give
reassurance; and I give it on three counts.
I see Professor Toffler outlines his thesis in these
words: 
-2-
" When diversity converges with transience and
novelty, we rocket the society towards an
historical crisis of adaptation. We create an
environment so ephemeral, unfamiliar and complex
as to threaten millions with adaptive breakdown.
This breakdown is future shock."
I suppose some of you might think that that is a description
of the Australian Government. I concede the " diversity" and the
" novelty". I concede that some people in Australia some of
them not a million miles from the Opposition benches are being
" rocketed into a crisis of adaptation" and I concede the " unfamiliar"
and the " complex" aspects of our Government. You will not be so
very surprised if I do not concede " transience" or " ephemerality".
And quite seriously, it is folly for business or for any section
of our Australian community, or for that matter, anybody abroad,
to regard the decision of the people on 2 December as some sort
of aberration, a temporary departure from the normalcy of stodgy
conservatism. To do so is to ignore some of the very great and
deep forces which have been at work in our society, not just for
the last six months, not just for the six weeks or the six months
before the elections, but for years and years.
The collapse of the Liberal Australian Government was
fundamentally a result of its failure over a very long period,
to respond to, or even to perceive, those changes at work.
The result of 2 December was not merely a change in Government,
but a real change in the direction of will and purpose in the
Australian community. Whatever the electoral fortunes of the
Labor Government may be, there is nothing transient, nothng
ephemeral in the forces which brought it to power. This is
something we all have to live with. A wise businessman, a prudent
investor, a competent manager, will recognise this as a fact of
life for many years to come and will plan accordingly. Paradoxically,
the forces and pressure for change will be the most stable, certain
element in Australian political and economic life in the foreseeable
future. I hope you are stably reassured.
Secondly, I want to reassure you that ours is a highly
predictable Government. I confess it makes me quite impatient
when I hear that business is uneasy or uncertain about our
intentions. I venture to say, in all seriousness, that no
administration in modern democratic history has entered office
with its intentions so precisely and specifically spelt out
and spelt out over so long a period. Let me illustrate: When I
had to conduct campaigns as Leader of the Opposition, in 1967,
Senate, in 1969, House of Representatives, in 1970, Senate,
and in 1972, House of Representativest I gave short shrift to
candidates or campaign officials or even advertising agencies
who complained that they did not know the policy until the night
of the policy speech. It was all there well before. It was in
the platform of the party. The priorities to be given to the
platform and the fleshing out of the bare bones of the platform
were contained in speech after speech my principal colleagues
and I had made in Parliament and around this country for months
and years before any of those elections* In the whole of that
period when I led the Opposition it was well known who were the
men who would hold the chief ministries. 
-3-
Any competent person could have written the essentials of the
1972 program upon which we were elected anybody who had read
what we had been saying for the last six years; and anybody who
can read that policy speech knows what this Government has been
about, throughout the last six months. If anyone has been
surprised, I can only take it that there is still an element
of surprise in the fact that an elected Government will actually
do what it said it would do.
We shall continue until the next elections, the steady,
progressive implementation of that program; after the next
elections, we shall proceed with the same deliberate speed
to implement the program for which we shall seek a mandate at
those elections. But in the broad and in the detail of those
160 specific undertakings which were deemed to be so excessive
and extravagant at the time if you want to know what the
Government is doing and what it will do read the policy speech.
It is true, we have just begun the process of framing
the Budget and there must necessarily be an area of doubt about
the provisions of this Budget as with any Budget. Has there
ever been a time when this has not been so? Speculation upon
the Budget surely did not begin with the election of a Labor
Government! It is in the nature of the system whereby the annual
Budget is regarded as the Goenmn' key economic and social
document. We are moving to change that. The Treasurer and I have
long put the view that the system of annual budgets worked against
effective long term planning and efficient short term economic
manipulation. The Budget has to bear an impossible burden if it
is made to perform a myriad of functions including the setting
out of national econo'mic and social goals. Accordingly, very
soon after achieving office, we decided to quicken the development
of a fully pledged program of forward estimates of Australian
expenditures. This decision is designed to affect significantly
in the future, the efficient allocation of resoures in the public
sector, The preparation of the forward estimates will mean that
the implications of Government programs can be examined over a
much longer time-span than the traditbnal annual budgetary period
permitted in the past. Further, we haveestablished a committee
of ministers to examine and analyse the information ofl expenditure
trends revealed in the estimates. The work of this committee
will considerably enhance our ability to guide expenditures towards
the areas of highest priority and will assist the Government in
more clearly defining our objectives and national goals. We shall
have a better idea of what we are about; so will everybody.
Nevertheless, we have a Budget to produce in August.
This week we have had some of the traditional pre-Budget talks
with industry. Whatever the Budget contains and it appears
that even the most rudimentary reference or common sense statement
by any of my ministers about the inevitable difficulties in
framing Labor's first Budget for 24 years will be deemed to indicate
a split or a crisis the Budget will be a fundamental financial
expression of the goals we set out in our program last year for
the elections. The Budget is not the be-all and end-all of that
program; it is a crucial element in achieving it. 
-4-
It is true that the economy is in a very different phase
from that existing at the time of the elections. The pattern
of the Budget must be determined in the light of the state of
the economy at the time of its preparation and must be based on
reasonable expectations of the way in which the economy will develop.
The remarkable fact about the present economic situation
is the dramatic and healthy change which has taken place in it
over the last six months. In the months before the election even
the previous Government was so concerned about the continued
slackness in the economy that it introduced special expansionist
measures despite the fact that its own budget had only just been
approved by Parliament. As late as December an independent professional
economic institute within the University of Melbourne was
reporting that the economy was still operating substantially below
capacity and seemed likely to continue to do so for months ahead.
There can be no doubt that the major task of economic
management facing the Government and the community generally is
to restrain the rising pressure of expenditure on resources and
to prevent inflationary rises in prices and in costs.
The task which faces the Cabinet is to produce a Budget
which will finance the Government's own essential programs and
also provide for the necessary restraint on rising levels of
private as well as public expenditure. The Government accepts
this responsibility and will come to the task of its preparation
ready to consider any form of fiscal action likely to contribute
to an effective performance of the task. But the great thrust
of the Budget must be to implement our clearly stated program
and goals. So the second reassurance I give you is about the basic
predictability of this Government.
The third reassurance I give you is that we fully
recognise the interdependence of a Labor Government and private
business. I acknowledgedin my policy speech that we could not
expect that our social program could be financed without a
significantly increased growth rate. Australia had been stumbling
along with a paltry growth rate of 3 per cent or so. I said
then that we would need to achieve a growth rate of 6 to 7 per
cent if our program were to be implemented without vastly increased
taxation. We shall probably achieve a rate higher than 7 per cent
this year. We can only achieve such a rate if all sectors of the
community, not least the private sector, is prosperous, efficient
and fully employed. You need a prosperous economy. So does
the Government. I know very well I cannot achieve a moiety of
what I want to achieve for the people of this country decent
schools, decent hospitals, decent cities, decent provision for
the sick, the aged and the handicapped without your prosperity
if you like, without your taxes. 
I said in the policy speech and the Governor-General
himself was gracious enough to repeat it in the speech from
the throne that We would establish consultative planning
machinery by which all sectors of industry, employers and
employees, would co-operate with us in the planning of the
economy and the promotion of the great goals of our society.
We shall faithfully abide by that undertaking. I understand
there are complaints in the business community about difficulties
in communication with the new ministers. I acknowledge things
have changed a little since December. No longer the midnight
telephone call from the influential address in Canberra or
even more influential address at Surfers Paradise. ( The Postmaster-
General is distinctly irked at the loss in his revenues.
Frank Crean is delighted at the savings. You see the difficulty
I have in getting unity in my Cabinet.) I know that over the
years, certain convenient and immediate lines of communication
did develop between leaders of industry and leading ministers.
I understand and I don't quibble at it, but you cannot really
be surprised that there has been some slight change. Let. me,
however, put this to you: were you really on such a good thing?
Did this allegedly comfortable relationship ever really help
you in the long term planning of your industry or your company?
Is it not a fact that, towards the end, our predecessors had
such a lack of any coherent or comprehensive policy that aJll
the consultation, all the private dinners and all the telephone
calls, left you none the wiser and certainly none -the richer?
Ido want communication with industry. I want it and
so do my ministers, every bit as much with private industry
as with the trade union movement. We want it on an open, regular,
constructive and in significant areas, institutionalised
basis. It is in this context that I wish to speak to you about
some of the basic structural reforms which we have implemented
or are about to create. Fundamental to the future of the
Australian economy is the question of national industrial policy.
This is not simply a matter of deciding that it is desirable
to have economic growth or economic development. It is worth
emphasising that the two are not necessarily the same. We know
it well in Australia. During the last generation we have
experienced a remarkable phase of economic development, yet it
has not been accompanied by a particularly creditable economic
growth. So when I speak of industrial policy, I am referring
to the problems of the relative rates of growth of all industry
primary, secondary and tertiary industry and to the various
industries within those sectors.
The disparity between our rate of development and our
rate of growth makes it quite clear that very serious distortions
in the productive capacity of Australian industry have arisen and
it is equally clear that the tariff system is centrally relevant
to this distortion. You know that quite early in the life of the
Government we asked Sir John Crawford to report on the establishment
of a Commission to replace the Tariff Board. His report is now
at hand this week. I should now say that he suggests a name
other than that of the " Protection Commission" which was the
term used in the policy speech and the Governor-General's speech. 
-6-
The M. T. I. A's own submission for which I thank and compliment
you suggested a similar change. If I refer here to the
Protection Commission, you will understand that it is without
prejudice to any decision of Cabinet on Sir John Crawford's
recommendation. The essential elements of my request to Sir
John were to make recommendations on a Commission which would be
able to conduct examinations independent of the pressures of day
to day politics and, above all, open to public scrutiny.
This kind of approach has, of course, typified the
work of the Tariff Board in recent years. Subject to the
limitations of staff and the restrictions of policy imposed
upon it by the form of some of the references to it, the Tariff
Board has had to deal with many of the problems of an industrial
policy. Unfortunately, it has suffered from two major inadequacies;
and it is these inadequacies that we hope the Protection Commission
will overcome. The first of them has been the limitation of scope.
We believe it is essential that any decision, whether of
commission or omission, should take full notice of its
implications for employment and existing investments, and that
when major adjustment is necessary as a consequence of such
decisions, the employment and other adjustments involved in
other words, the reallocation of labour and capital should
take place in such a way as to avoid the traumas and hardships
which structural adjustments have involved in the past,
The second major limitation of the Tariff Board has been
the blinkers which have been foisted upon it in the past. With
few exceptions, only the problems of manufacturing industry have
been referred to the Board. We intend to change that and have
levels of protection of both agriculture and secondary industry
decided by the same body. Again non-tariff forms of assistance
have been generally decided in widely different ways ways
which often have been unco-ordinated and at variance with one
another. We have set up with a Secretariat in my Department
a standing inter-departmental committee responsible for
advising on all assistance to industries. This will make for
more coherent and consistent decision making.
Again, one might point out that never has the Tariff
Board, or any other independent statutory authority, been asked
to report upon the prospects for a new industry or the question
of which of Australia's existing or embryonic industries offer
prospects of viability without assistance of an open-ended kind
from the taxpayer. 
-7-
In this context, it might be worth emphasising that
in pointing out this deficiency I am not proposing that any
body or any Governmental authority in Australia should set
itself up to select which industries should be allowed to exist
and which should be put out of business.
But it is the responsibility of the Government to decide
what is the national advantage in terms of particular industries,
when any kind of official patronage, that is, the taxpayers'
money is involved.
Now there are some implications of this that I am sure
will be music to your ears. I know how dedicated you all are,
how determined you all are, to uphold the principle of free
enterprise and open competition. I know how much you will
welcome every decision which will promote competition. The
Protection Commission should help to this end.
In expanding and building upon the role of the Tariff
Board through the new Commission, whatever the final form of
it may be, the Government intends to lay the basis for an
industrial policy for Australia, in which the emphasis will be
upon change and dynamic adjustment.
It is not a pretty sight in a country like Australia,
so rich in natural resources and with such a potentiality for
growth, to see the instant ossification which sets in in so
many enterprises and indeed whole industries. As soon as an
industry has come into existence, too often it considers that
its very existence entitles it to a certificate of immortality
and changelessness, to be guaranteed a safe and easy life by
way of Government subsidy and protection through tariffs or,
even worse, permanent quantitive controls on imports.
When the Great Depression struck the world, the retreat
behind tariff barriers on a worldwide scale was understandable,
even if not always wise. Jobs and livelihoods for millions of
people were at stake, and the threat of economic warfare by
dumping led to the practice of economic warfare by tariffs.
Nevertheless, it cannot be repeated too often that at
a time of full employment and labour shortages, as will be the
case soon, no serious threat to jobs is involved in prodding
industry into greater resilience and adaptability to change by
exposing it to a more competitive climate. It becomes for
Government much more a social problem than an employment problem.
When in some cases, in the interests of economic growth,
it becomes necessary to encourage job changes, the duty of the
Government is to act on the side of the change, not resist it,
and to facilitate the transfer of employees into expanding
industries and out of uneconomic and contracting industries. 
-8-
The Government is studying the problems of adjustment
assistance for structural change, in its industrial, manpower
retraining and social security aspects. We shall never allow
change to be bought at the cost of human hardship. Neither shall
we build unnecessary rigidities into the Australian economy
merely in order to enable people, whether they be employers or
employees, to continue in a particular industry just because
they are used to it and don't want to learn anything new. This
can only lead to stagnation and the sacrifice of economic growth,
not in the name of something rational like preservation of the
environment but in the name of sluggishness and conservatism.
Australia should be able to pride herself upon a vigorous
and independent approach to her role in the international economic
community. She will be able to do so only if we develop an
industrial policy which is directed towards adaptation, and strive
to overcome the inbuilt resistance of vested interests to any
structural changes in the domestic economy.
Like most countries of the world today, Australia has
encountered serious inflationary problems. There can be no doubt
that inflation is a disruptive influence on the economy and
society, and it is in the interests of all that it should be
held in check. If prices continue to rise sharply in the erratic
and unpredictable ways that have characterised recent experience,
no-one in Government, in business, or in private life can plan
confidently for the future. This problem has led to extreme
measures being taken in some countries, in particdlar the United
Kingdom and the United States.
The Australian Government is determined to contain
inflationary pressures. It will not be easy. We are aware
of the need to manage economic affairs prudently to avoid too
great a strain on Australia's resources. We intend to do so
with the co-operation of business and the public at large.
For this reason, we have established a Prices Justification
Tribunal which will have the task of enquiring into and reporting
upon the prices charged and any price rises proposed by large
companies. Its reports will state whether, in the opinion of
the Tribunal, this or that price or price rise is justified.
We confidently expect that the companies concerned will abide
by the Tribunal's judgements in these matters and, as the Tribunal
will provide a forum for discussion of these matters in public
hearings, we believe that its operations will have the force of
public opinion behind them. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that business should recognise its own best interests
and the best interests of Australia in co-operating with the
Tribunal in all respects.
Further, we are determined to step up the long term
growth of productivity in Australia by a variety of measures. 
-9-
First, we intend to stimulate both internal and external
competition and at the same time to improve the competitiveness
of Australian industry. Existing Australian legislation in the
restrictive trade practices field is of limited effectiveness.
Even our predecessois recognised that. We propose to deal with
restrictive trade practices by directly prohibiting them instead
of leaving them to be restrained separately after time-consuming
enquiries, as is the case with most practices at present.
The Government has done a great deal of preparatory
work in formulating new and stronger legislation along these
lines. I do not see stronger restrictive trade practices
legislation as something for industry to fear. Obviously,
there will be adjustments to be made. But as the influence
of this legislation spreads we can expect a sharper, more
competitive spirit to emerge in the economy, with industry
quicker to respond to changes in the market and in the available
techniques of production and distribution, and quicker to respond
to new opportunities in general. This must be to the benefit
of everyone. Secondly, we hope to move towards more outward looking
trade and development strategies adopted by such other small
rich industrial economies as Sweden, Denmark and Norway, economies
which have increased the real average living standards of
their population considerably faster than we have, and at the
same time, looked after their sick and poor much better than we
have. There is need to recognise that increasingly our
manufacturing industries should become more oriented to
international markets. However, no wholesale upheaval of the
Australian industrial structure will result from our policies.
Rather any alterations to existing policies, or the introduction
of new ones, will be gradual. The Government is aware that its
policies will involve some changes ofemphasis and of direction.
It recognises the need to ease the transition by providing as
much notice to industry as possible to plan for changes of
direction and where possible to give industry time to adjust
to new circumstances. Thirdly, we aim to increase the adaptability of the
Australian economy to changing technology and to changing
economic conditions both at home and abroad. Action has
already been set in train by the ministers for Secondary Industry,
Labour and Social Security and to develop a comprehensive and
co-ordinated set of policy measures on
Labour training and re-training;
Relocation of industries and workforces;
Adjustment assistance to industries affected;
Effective social security and welfare measures to
protect individuals and their families involved. 
Currently a high level governmental mission is overseas
studying relevant experience in other countries. Such a program
will enable the Government, in co-operation with industry and
the trade unions, to accelerate the movement towards a more
viable and profitable industrial structure.
The long term structural changes which need to be made
to achieve a lift in the real income growth of the community
may require Government assistance in many areas to ensure that
the associated human and economic problems of change are at
least minimised and, where possible, avoided.
Finally, it is particularly appropriate that I should
mention at a seminar under the auspices of the the
question of industrial relations. The great breakthrough
towards industrial sanity in Australia came when the M. T. I. A.
recognised that the prosperity of both employers and employees
rested upon industrial co-operation, not industrial confrontation.
Your members know full well the futility of the provocation of
the penal clauses. Your members will know the advantages to
yourselves of union amalgamation. You must find it as ludicrous as
I do that a majority in the Senate should seek to thwart our
mandate on two such matters one of them, at least, " inoperative"
if no-one finds it offensive or interfering for me to use that
word. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to commend the efforts
your Association has made in recent years to bring about a better
industrial climate by replacing the idea of confrontation in
industrial relations with co-operation. In future years, I
believe that the writers on industrial relations will regard the
1971 metal trades negotiations and agreement as a major initiative
in the development of a more satisfactory system of industrial
relations. I congratulate the M. T. I. A. on the initiatives it took
to reach agreement with the metal trades unions for an agreement
covering this important industry, an example of bargaining with
the assistance of the Commission without any industrial stoppages.
I believe that this will be regarded as an outstanding
example of the way industrial relations in Australia can and should
be conducted. In all these matters in economic management, in tariff
policy, in industrial relations, in social engineering we are
seeking new machinery, better structures, mom public processes,
to achieve our program for change. 
-11
Returning to the brochure promoting this seminar,
reference is made to the " sickness that comes from too much
change in too short a time". I cannot accept the proposition
that it is the change which causes the sickness. It is the
failure to prepare for change and to plan for change. Change
itself is inevitable. I do not fear it. Where we have failed
so often in the past is in failing to anticipate it, and failing
to develop modern and contemporary institutions to deal with it.
It is the duty of a Government devoted to change in an era of
change to develop those structures and institutions. This is
what we are doing. We know our creations can only be truly
effective if they are based on co-operation and open dealings
with the public. Co-operation, open dealing, contemporary
institutions for planning and achieving clearly stated national
goals those, I believe, are the best antidotes against future
shock. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
AT THE ALBURY TRADE FAIR SATURDAY 21 JULY, 1973
I am glad of the opportunity to visit the Albury Trade
Fair ( this year entitled " New Cities Expo ' 73" 1) and speak to you
tonight. The scope and quality of the Fair and certainly its
title are an encouraging symbol of what we hope to achieve in
this, our first growth centre4
I first spoke at Albury more than three years ago. At
the opening of the 38th Annual Conference of Rotary International
I suggested that Albury/ Wodonga would be a perfect place for a new
city. When we were elected we wasted no time in setting about to
fulfil that promise. It is just six months since I met with the
Premier of Victoria, Mr. Hamer, and the Premier of New South Wales,
Sir Robert Asking here, and we agreed on the proposal to create
a new Australian city.
There is, of course, no such thing as an " instant" city.
In sensitive planning areas pat solutions must be suspect. However,
although some of you may feel that there has been little tangible
evidence of the new project, if you examine what has been done over
this time, you will realise that w~ e have built a very sound base on
which the area will grow.
My colleague, the Australian Minister for Urban and
Regional Development, Tom Uren, outlined our achievements to you on
Thursday night. One of the most satisfying of these is the way in
which the three governments have worked in such harmony on the
project. He also explained the organisation which will be set up
to undertake the planning and development of the growth complex..
hope that this wil~ l have answered any questions or doubts you will
have had on this subject.
The Ministerial Council made up of Mr. Uren, the New
South Wales Minister for Decentralisation and Development, Mr.
Fuller, and the Victorian Minister for State Development and
Decentralisation and Development, Mr. Byrne, has agreed that the.
development organisation will be established before the end of this
year. I support this timetable and the Australian Government will
do everything within its power to see that enabling legislation
is passed in the forthcoming session of the Australian Parliament.
The Australian Government believes that the last election
was won largely because of the apalling lack of foresight which has
led to the congestion and strangling snarl of unplanned growth in
our cities, By the creation of Albury/ Wodonga; by the development
of other new cities and growth area, by concentrating on alleviating
the problems of people in the worst hit western areas of Sydney
and Melbourne; by the creation of land commissions and by making
federal money more immediately available to local, government, we
believe we will be able to bring order back into the lives of urban
dwelling Australians. 
-2-
The Australian Government cannot do the job on its own,
particularly in view of constitutional limitations on its power.
To carry out projects such as Albury/ Wodonga the Australian
Government has to work in close co-operation with the States and
local instrumentalities. The new Department of Urban and Regional Development will
have the responsibility for developing and implementing a national
urban and regional development strategy as a major policy area of
the Australian Government. It will also have the responsibility for
negotiating with, advising and helping state and local governments
in the preparation and implementation of urban and regional plans.
With the chief co-ordination and policy-making role in
the area of urban and regional development lying with the Department,
it will be the Cities Commission which will be chiefly responsible
for the physical development of Albury/ Wodonga. The Commission is
also under the control of the Minister for Urban and Regional
Development and is linked to the Department.
One of the main ways in which the Australian Government
will be helping the States in the development of Albury/ Wodonga
is with money. It will finance land acquisition and land
development by interest-bearing advances although in the long
term I believe that this growth complex will be self-supporting.,
At present we cannot expect New South Wales and Victoria
to switch resources quickly to Albury/ Wodonga in fields like
education and health while there are backlogs elsewhere in the
States. Certain existing municipal services will need to be
supplemented and in this respect special federal grants or longterm
loans will be made available in the early years. Nevertheless
in keeping with the tripartite nature of the enterprise, the
Victorian and New South Wales Governments will be providing services
to keep pace with the accelerated growth of Albury/ Wodonga beyond
this initial phase.:
The development of Albury/ Wodonga has been accorded high
priority by the Australian Government this year and this will be
reflected in the forthcoming budget.
We reali~ e, of course, that in the development of any new
area there are a multitude of problems to be overcome. With
planning and co-operation between the Australian Government, the
Governments of the two States of Victoria and New South Wales and
local government in the regions, we are confident we will overcome
them. One of the problems which has been aired frequently in
the press and by people in the area is the problem of the rising
price of land. To deal with one aspect of this, the Premiers of
Victoria and New South Wales and I agreed after a meeting at
Albury/ Wodonga on 25 January that the price of land to be acquired
for the purposes of the project would be based at the market level
of prices prevailing at 3 October last year. This means that the land
which the Governments will acquire is stabilised not frozen at
that price. Any necessary adjustments will be made for general
land price changes during the period up to the date of purchase,
caused by factors apart from the announcement of the development 
-3-
of the area. In this way we have ensured that no profit is made
merely because the area is to be developed, but that those whose
land is to be acquired will not suffer because of this. Legislation
to implement this decision was introduced into the Victorian
Parliament -in June and will be debated in the Upper House in the
spring session of Parliament. New South Wales expects to introduce
complementary legislation within the same session.
Officers from the Cities Commission have recently been
investigating the whole land question in Albury/ Wodonga. They have
been looking into land availability, the extent to which land is
changing hands : in Albury/ Wodonga and the pressures on existing land,
housing and social infrastructure. We must find out what the facts
are before we can contemplate what action is to be taken.
Today no-one debunks the idea of decentralisation.
However, some people are still dubious about the idea of the
development of inland cities. Australians, they say, want to live
on the coas-t, and they point to the growth in the coastal cities.
It has always been beyond me how people who have to travel for two
hours through weekend traffic to get to the crowded city beaches
can claim to be living on the coast. Whatever relaxation and
regeneration they can claim from this trip to the sea must be
dissipated in the tedious crawl through the traffic to get there
and back. Many Australians liv ng in large " coastal" cities
cannot truly be said to be living by the sea. It takes them as
long to reach the sea as it takes the citizens of that first
successful Australian inland growth centre Canberra. We expect
with the development of Albury/ Wodonga to dissipate this great
coastal cringe and return to something of the feeling of the early
settlers who set off to populate the inland of this vast tract of
earth they had come to occupy.
Much has been said of the advantages of choosing Albury/
Wodonga for our first designated growth centre; its positions on a
major inter-capital link; its present state of development; its
happy incorporation of two States. But I feel that few people yet
realise the advantages to its present and future residents in terms
of what is offering in the surrounding inland countryside. At the
risk of sounding like a tourist guide I suggest that those who might
flinch at the thought of leaving the recreational facilities of their
" 1coastal" cities might consider the enormous scope for activities
like fishing, climbing, walking, ski-ing, canoe-ing and sailing
offered by Albury/ Wodongals proximity to some splendid mountains,
rivers and Lake Hume. For those with an interest in Australian
history nearby towns like Beechworth in Victoria have preserved and
still have in use an almost overwhelming number of buildings
classified by the National Trust. Now that the Government has
established a committee of inquiry into the national estate chaired
by Mr. Justice Hope we would hope that the respect for history
prevailing in such towns will be given an opportunity to prevail
through the rest of Australia, And for those who like their
pleasures somewhat more full-bodied there are of course the
vinyards of the Rutherglen and Glenrowan areas* 
-4-
It is this accessibility to a variety of activities which
makes Albury/ Wodonga a satisfying place, in addition to the simple
advantage of living in a smaller and well-planned community.
Compare this with the isolation from most of the benefits of the
city suffered by people living in the sprawling outer suburbs of
Sydney and Melbourne suburbs which are increasingly the only
ones available to young couples who want to buy their own homes.
We spoke of quality of life in the last national
elections. We belieye that the creation of Albury/ Wodonga, along
with other growth centres, will prove a step which will vastly
improve the quality of life of thousands of Australians over the
next few decadeso 



A NQ9 DATE
M/ 115 31 July 1973
PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, WASHINGTON
The following is the text of an address by the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Whitlam, to the
National Press Club, Washington, at 1300 hours ( Washington time)
30 July, 1973: " It is an honor for me to be asked to address representatives
of the world's greatest and most free press in the capital of the
world's greatest and most free democracy.
The strength of each is the strength of both.
In accepting your invitation I pay tribute to the
manifest and enduring strength of both.
It's been suggested that your chief interest today is to
hear something about the changes in Australia's policies as a result
of the change in the Australian Government, changes affecting our
international relations and particularly the relations between
Australia and the United States.
True, there have been changes, important and, I naturally
enough believe, beneficial changes. o. ./ 2 
-2-
To put them in perspective, however, I should say three
things at the outset.
First, the changes the Australian Government has made are
only part of a profound change taking place in the whole pattern of
international relations, especially in the Western Pacific.
The initiative for these changes came not, of course, from
Australia, but from the United States.
These initiatives President Nixon's initiatives have
created a new reality for our region.
Part of Australia's task has been to ratify the new
reality. If in some specific matters such as recognition of the
People's Republic of China and the ending of the last vestiges of
Australia's military commitment in Indo-China Australia has been
able to move immediately, it is largely because of a difference in
obligations, not ultimate intentions.
Clearly, the United States has obligations, commitments
and burdens far more complex than those of Australia.
Secondly, the ability of an Australian government, if so
minded, to effect policy changes more rapidly than the United States,
partly reflects a difference in our systems of government. / 3 
For instance, while it's not true, as suggested at least
in sections of the Australian press, that the American Embassy in
Canberra or the State Department was caught by surprise by the election
results in my country, there may have been some surprise in some
quarters at the speed with which our machinery allowed us to move.
I did not have to wait three months for my inauguration.
Three days after election day, I was able to form a Government
with one other colleague. It was in fact the smallest administration
to have responsibility for Australia since the first Duke of Wellington
was last Prime Minister of England.
In two weeks we were able to clear off a whole range of
undertakings on which we have been campaigning.
As long as it doesn't go beyond these walls, I'll confide
in you that I found those two weeks quite exhilarating.
SBut I do emphasise that nothing we did then, or which the
rather larger Government has done since, was other than eminently
predictable to anybody anywhere with any grasp of our specific
policies or broader program.
Knd thirdly, there is an essential continuity underlying
the process of change a continuity in Australia's real national
interests, in Australia's international obligations, in Australia's
alliances and Australia's friendships.
We seek new relationships. / 4 
We do not seek them at the expense of old, firm ones,
I might bring these three points together the world
pattern of change within which the Australian Government is acting,
the predictability of the changes we are making. and the continuity
within change with a single illustration.
It is just two years since I went to Peking as Leader of
the Opposition. In the Australian political context of the time, this was
considered quite a risky business.
What nobody knew even the world's best-informed and most
alert and vigilant press was that Dr Kissinger was in Peking at
precisely the same time,
And when President Nixon made his historic announcement
a week or so later, a quite remarkable transformation took place,
I have to acknowledge I do so gladly that if it had not
been for President Nixon's initiative, my own Peking visit would,
given the Australian climate of the time, have been ' no political
advantage to me, even as late as last December.
Plainly, however, there could be no surprise that, within
three weeks of our election, we were able to establish diplomatic
relations with China on the exact terms we had for so long undertaken
by removing Australia's China Embassy from Taipei to Peking, the
capital of' China of which Taiwan is a province. 
We are now quickly and successfully developing our contacts
with China over the whole range of our mutual interests,
But in our efforts to redress the imbalance of a generation
of unthinking lostility towards China, we do not propose to introduce
a new imbalance by discarding or downgrading older relationships.
We do not intend to substitute a new distortion for old
distortions. Undoubtedly the most important of those relationships is
the American connection,
This is symbolised by the Anzus Treaty. But Anzus is not
the be-all and end-all of that relationship and never has been. P
Important as Anzus is, the relationship is many-sided,
and I am convinced deep and enduring, at all levels,
There are many misconceptions about Anzus.
It was originally designed as a reassurance to Australia
and New Zealand against the possibility of uapanese military
resurgence, Nobody would now view it in that light,
Only a person totally insensitive to Japanese post-war
asoirations would seek to encourage or anticipate such a resurgence. 
-6-
Further, we have tended to overlook in Australia that
Anzus invokes " the constitutional processes" of its Doartners,
We have tended to ignore the role of Congress in those
processes, Anzus happens to be one treaty which has not been seriously
questioned by any section of C ingress,
My government wants to move away from the narrow view that
the Anzus Treaty is the only significant factor in our relations with
the United States and the equally narrow view that our relations
with the United States are the only significant factor in Australia's
foreign relations. Anzus is important but it is only one anpect of the very
wide range of interests and obligations linking with the United
States, Our relations with the United States are very imnortant
but again only one aspect of our interests and obligations in our
region and around the world.
But I repeat that as we seek to widen and strengthen
those other relations, we do not do so at the expense of existing
ones. Naturally there will be differences in approach to
several. international questions between Australia and the United
States. T believe, however, we should explore constructively
the wide areas of agreement which unite us rather than 
seek to emphasise those few matters on which we are divided or take
a different approach towards the same basic end.
I believe that this alliance is old enough and strong
enough to stand a little frankness on both sides.
I believe that the friendship which we offer America now,
namely that of a robust middle power, making its own assessments and
its own decisions in consultation with other interested countries9
provides a better basis for a durable relationship of friendship
between Australia and the United States than existed in the past,.
We do not wish to grandstand or thumb our noses at the
United States. When our interests do not coincide and wh~ en we disagree with
the United States we snail, as a good friend shouid, say so firmly
and frankly, usually, and -Dreferaoly, in private.
But again. le' get this in perspective.,
The most important matters are not those on whia-n the
United States and Australia are likely to disagree, uinder this or any
American or Australian administration,,
What we wish to do, what we are doing, is to see that the
official United States view is not the only view ever considered by
an Australian Government, a. 78 
For example, in determining our position on any matter
before the United Nations, I wish to know the view of our neighbours
and our other friends just as 1 want to know the view of the United
States, Nothing could be further from the truth than the suggestion
that under the new Government Australia is going isolationist,,
That is just as absurd as the idea that we are mioving into
a different ideological orbit,
Precisely what we are trying to do is to break out of a
kind of ideological isolationism which has limited the conduct of
our affairs in the past,
I~ n our own region, in our dealings with all the countries
of that region we think it' -time for an ideological holiday.
That is why we have established diplomatic relations
with a range of Governments as diverse as North Viet-N~ am and the
Vatican,, It is, if you like, a policy of diplomatic even--handed. iess,
It does not mean that Australia is not aligned,,
We are by definition aligned, through Arizus.
it does mean, however, that we propose that our dealings
with all nations should be less ideologically orientated than
hitherto,/ 
-9-
For twenty years I have been appalled at the damage we
of the west have done to ourselves and to other peoples by our
Western ideological preoccupations, particularly in South-East Asia,,
We are not going to be readily forgiven for throwing away
the chance we had for a settlement in Indo-China in 1954, after
Korea, after Geneva,
And if I had to sum up my own determination and that of
my Government in a single sentence, I would state that I am
determined that nothing Australia does by action or inaction will
contribute to a second, final loss of opportunity,
We have all been given a second chance,
It must not be thrown away,
This would be the unforgivable crime agtainst humanity,
It may not be out of order for me to refer to something
a distinguished correspondent of the " New York Timres" said to a
senior Australian diplomat a coupl~ e of years ago about Australia.
He said that even to the best informed American, Australia
was merely a satellite of the United States; to the 20 million
non-white Americans, or those of them who knew anything of Australia,
it was a racist country; to the vast majority of Americans it was
~ just a large and empty space on the map,. 
~
This judgment of two years ago is a harsh one indeed,
As a description of Australia it is 90 per cent wrong, and
it was wrong even at the time it was made.
But it is just that 10 per cent of truth which can make
an Australian uneasy, and which it is the concern of my Government
to remove. We are not a satellite of any country.
We are a friend and a partner of the United States
particularly in the Pacific; but with independent interests of
our own. As a Government, we are determined that Australia shall
not be open to charges of racism.
We are not just a large and empty space on the map.
We are a middle power with substantial resources, with
a people of considerable skill and vigor.
Australia's past shortcomings, the mistakes in our international
dealings have sprung in large measure from a vague and
generalised fear of our own environment, the feeling of being
alien in our own continent and our own region. 
-11-
As a result, we have tended to swing between isolationism
and interventionism, between " fortress Australia" and over-dependence
on one great powerful protector; and, culturally, between slavish
imitation and brash self-assertion.
What is sometimes called a new nationalism, for which the
election of this Government is seen as a catalyst, is, I hope,
really the beginning of self-confidence, the realisation that we
are there to stay as a people whose possession of a vast rich
continent has endowed us with unique opportunities, yet very great
obligations. My great hope for my Government, however long it may endure
or as my opponents would say be endured, is that it will see the
end of the old inhibitions, the self-defeating fears about Australia's
place in the world, and the beginning of a creative maturity." 



( N
EMBARGO: 8.15 P. M,
PARRA14ATTA BY-ELECTION
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
PARRAMATTA TOWN HALL,
FRIDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 1973
A fortnight ago, I launched Labor's campaign for Parramatta.
Tonight, I launch another campaign not a campaign on behalf of the
Australian Labor Party, but a campaign on behalf of the Australian
people. And this campaign is not a test for the Australian Labor
Party but a test for the Australian people themselves. And it is
a test for great, important, and vocal sections of the Australian
community. The Australian Government shall, before Christmas,
submit to you, the people, a referendum to give the national
government power over prices. The Australian Government is
determined to combat inflation. We shall all have the opportunity
within the next few days, within the next few weeks, within the
next few months, to see whether that determination is shared by
the individuals and groups who have been so vocal on this matter so
recently. In particular you will all be able to judge within the
next few days, how sincere the Liberal Party, the Country Party,
and the five Senators currently engaged in courtship with the
Country Party, are about the fight against inflation. The acid
test will come next week. We-have heard the Leader of the
opposition demanding a prices and incomes freeze. The National
Government a Whitlam Government, any more than a McMahon
Government, even with so brilliant a Treasurer as Mr. Snedden
has not the power to freeze prices or incomes. The Liberals
know this; the writers of editorials know this; the people of
Australia know this. We propose to ask the people to change it.
to give us at least the power which governments in any comparable
country, whatever their systems, unitary or federal, already have.
We'shall be seeking that power; but before we can do so, we have
to get the Parliament to authorise us to refer the matter to the
people. And whether that reference is made now lies fairly and
squarely with our opponents. We await their declaration of intent.
There are other people involved in this matter, other
people responsible for the course that the Government has felt
impelled to take. I refer to the Premiers in the three eastern
States the anti-Labor Premiers. The basic reason why the
Government has felt obliged to take this course is because of
the refusal of these Premiers either to use their powers the
undoubted powers of these States or to refer their powers to the
National Government. These Premiers blather and bleat about
inflation; yet they would not budge an inch towards helping the
National Government do its job. I acknowlege, rather, I proclaim,
the fundamental responsibility of the National Government for the
economic management and the well-being of this nation. I do not
slide away from that at all. But the Premiers in the anti--. Tabor
States have refused point blank to give us the constitutional and
legal power to do our job. It is because of that refusal that
we now propose to go direct to the people of Australia. 
-2-
At Ermington, a fortnight ago, I undertook to ask the
Premiers of New South Wales and Victoria to refer this power.
I put the proposition to them on the opening day of the
Constitutional Convention, last Monday. I said:
" The Australian Paradox is that the National Government
is in a stronger position vis a vis the States in
financial matters than the national governments in any
other federal system; but it is in a weaker position in
economic powers than national governments in any other
federal system. There is the matter of prices, for
example. The Nixon Administration had the power to
introduce price freezes. The Australian Government has
not the McMahon Government no more than the Whitlam
Government. There may be arguments about the economic
effectiveness of such freezes, but there can be no question
that if they are to be in any way effective whatsoever, they
must be immediate and unchallenged in their application.
I do not assert and I do not concede that the Australian
Parliament could not enforce an effective prices policy
by legislating under the corporations power. I do,
however, assert, and I have to concede, that such
legislation would be challenged in the High Court and its
application would be stalled for many, many months in the
process. The crucial element of immediacy would be lost.
Unquestionably, the Australian Parliament should have
legislative power over prices, whatever the Government in
office. The Parliament can try to obtain the power by
referendum but that would take some months the number of
months depending upon whether the Bill was passed or rejected
by the Senate. Alternatively, the Parliament can obtain
the power by reference, by some or all State Parliaments,
That is something which could be done in a matter of weeks.
The reference of power could be permanent or temporary.
If, however, the Governments in the two great States of
New South Wales and Victoria, Governments which currently
have a majority in both Houses of their Parliaments, decline
to introduce a Bill, then the reference would be ineffective.
I venture to say that without New South Wales and Victoria,
it would be a largely futile exercise, ' While, with those
two States alone referring, it could be made effective
throughout Australia. If the Premiers of New-South Wales
and Victoria were to offer such a reference, then this
Convention would be indeed a landmark in Australian economic,
political and constitutional history."
But those ? remiers have refused to refer this power to the
national government.
The National Government of Australia should have
reasonable constitutional powers to manage the nation's economy.
We have not got it; we now seek it. The States the anti-
Labor States will not do their job; we now have to ask you
to equip us to do the job. 
-3-
I recognise, and everybody recognises, that the kind
of inflation we are now experiencing is not only a matter of
prices. There is the matter of incomes and that means your
income, your salary, your wage. The fact is, of course, that
Australia has a highly complex and highly regulated system of
wage fixation. The system is in fact one-sided; wages are
fixed, prices are not. But I can say this, speaking not only
as the Prime Minister of Australia, speaking not only as the
Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party, speaking not only
as the Leader of the Australian Labor Party, but as the Leader
of the Australian Labor movement if the people of Australia
give us power to control prices and if our efforts to contain
inflation within reasonable limits then fail, we shall receive
the full co-operation of the trade union movement in restraining
wages incomes. But what the trade union movement will first ask
is that the national government and the whole public shall
together show that they are dinkum on this matter of curbing
inflation. If we show we are dinkum, the trade union movement
stands ready to show restraint in the interest of the whole
people, of whom its members and dependants form the great bulk.
I still appeal to every section of the community to
get this whole matter in perspective. The national government
needs reasonable powers to manage the economy. Inflation is
undoubtedly a major problem, the besetting problem of current
economic management. But is it not the be-all and end-all of
our national problems. And indeed it is as much a inter-national
problem as it is a national one. But I long ago determined that
the Labor Government which I head would not be reduced to a
nullity by any unreal pre-occupation. It would be monstrous
if a Labor Government, coming into power after 23 years were to
attempt nothing more than curbing some of the gross economic
defects created by our predecessors. When the Government framed
its Budget, it had to look at the whole range of problems created
by our predecessors, the whole backlog of 23 years of conservative
rule. Growing inflation was only one of these problems. It is
true that the Treasurer could have brought down a traditional
Budget designed to contain economic growth. It is true, for
instance, that we could have renegged on our program.
But what would that have meant?
What is the big new factor in the spending of this
Government? It is on education. I could have starved the
schools; I could thereby have received plaudits for a " responsible"
Budget; and I should have penalised every Australian child, now at*
school or about to enter school not just for this year but for
the rest of his life. I would not have a bar of it. 
-4-
I for one am not prepared to say that an Australian
child who happens to be in school in 1973 must pay the penalty
for 23 years of Liberal mismanagement or pay the penalty for a
passing economic problem, no matter how difficult and complex
and intransigent that economic problem may be. I am not prepared
to say that Government spending designed to reduce costs or to
promote production in years and decades to come must be
indefinitely postponed, just in order to save money in 1973.
One of the principal reasons why our costs are rising is because
spending in the public sector was postponed or entirely refused
for so long. Why are land costs soaring? Because of the refusal of
past governments to involve themselves in public ownership of
land. Why are transport costs soaring? Because of the refusal
of previous governments to spend money on the upgrading of the
public transport system, and particularly by the refusal of the
national government to involve itself in urban transport systems.
Why are our cities so expensive to the individual and the
family?. Because of the failure of past national governments of
Australia to involve themselves in the business of cities as much
as the governments of all comparable countries have done for long
past.* Why is health so expensive and why are our hospitals
so inadequate? Because the previous government encouraged these
fly-blown private bureacracies and high-flown pretensions of
doctors. I suggest we did not even have a choice about whether
or not we would act on these matters of schools and cities and
hospitals. It was to act on these matters that the people elected
us last December. And we were not prepared to sacrifice yet
another generation of children and pensioners, the handicapped,
the old, the sick, the aboricines and the city dwellers of this
country. We have begun to do the job for which the people of
Australia elected us. We shall before Christmas be asking you to
give us another weapon so that we can continue to do that job.
The times are not so urgent but we are no less sincere when we
again say " Give us the tools and we will finish the job". 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MlINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM,. O. C.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE MASTER BUILDERS' ASSOCIATION CENTENARY
PARADE OF HOMES AND PRESENTATION OF THE " PEARCE RESERVE" TO
THE MUNICIPALITY OF BLACKIOWN, AT KINGS LANGLEY, NEAR SEVEN
HILLS,-FRIDAY 14 SEPTEMBER 1973-
No ONE SEEING THIS EXHIBITION CAN BE OTHER THAN
IMPRESSED AND ENCOURAGED BY THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
BUILDING INDUSTRY, No ONE CAN DOUBT THE INDUSTRY'S ABILITY TO
PROVIDE HOUSING OF HIGH QUALITY AND IMAGINATIVE DESIGN. IT
WOULD-BE A PITY, HOWEVER, IF THIS FINE DISPLAY OF HOMES WERE
USED MERELY AS A PROMOTIONAL EXERCISE, IT SHOULD ALSO SERVE TO
REMIND US OF A RESPONSIBILITY WE ALL SHARE -GOVERNMENTS1
BUILDERS, DEVELOPERS, AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES -TO ENSURE THAT
THE HOUSING NEEDS OF OUR PEOPLE ARE FULLY AND PROMPTLY MET.
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE BEEN WAITING Al" LONG TIME
FOR A FAIR DEAL IN HOUSING, I HOPE YOU WILL FORGIVE ME IF I
RECALL SOME WORDS I USED 20 YEARS AGOp IN MY FIRST SPEECH IN
THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT. I SAID THEN:
NO~ ONE THINKS THAT 20 YEARS AGO THE PEOPLE OF
AUSTRALIA WERE ADEQUATELY HOUSED; AND NOBODY
THINKS THAT THEY ARE ADEQUATELY HOUSED NOW. / 2 
-2-
TWENTY YEARS LATER, THOSE WORDS ARE STILL TRUE, IT IS SHAMEFUL
THAT IN 1973, THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA ARE STILL NOT ADEQUATELY
HOUSED, IT IS SHAMEFUL THAT IN A NATION WITH ABUNDANT SPACE,
CONSIDERABLE WEALTH, A MODEST POPULATION, AND A GENERAL
COMMITMENT TO THE IDEALS OF SOCIAL WELFARE, THOUSANDS OF
AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES ARE BADLY HOUSED AND ARE UNABLE TO AFFORD
THIS FUNDAMENTAL AMENITY OF A DECENT LIFE, MY GOVERNMENT IS
DETERMINED TO PUT THIS RIGHT, WE ARE DETERMINED TO ENSURE, WITH
THE HELP OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN
FAMILY CAN SECURE ACCOMMODATION OF ITS OWN CHOOSING, APPROPRIATE
TO ITS OWN NEEDS,
THE BUDGET BROUGHT DOWN BY MY COLLEAGUE, THE TREASURER,
LAST MONTH WAS ONE OF THE PRIMARY INSTRUMENTS IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
DRIVE FOR BETTER HOUSING, WE TOOK ACTION ON SEVERAL FRONTS,
OUR PRIORITIES CAN BEST BE SUMMED UP BY COMPARING OUR FIRST
BUDGET WITH THAT OF LAST YEAR, BY FAR THE BIGGEST INCREASE
324 PER CENT WAS IN THE CATEGORY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
AMENITIES, ,/ 3 
-3-
WE PROVIDED $ 136 MILLION FOR OUR INITIATIVES IN THE
CITIES, INCLUDING $ 33 MILLION FOR EXPENDITURE ON NEW CITIES
SUCH AS ALBURY-WODONGA. WE HAVE SET ASIDE $ 30 MILLION THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR TO HELP THE STATES ACQUIRE LAND FOR URBAN
DEVELOPMENT. THIS SHOULD BE SEEN AS MERELY THE BEGINNING OF
A CONTINUING INVOLVEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN LAND
ACQUISITION AND MANAGEMENT FOR THE BENEFIT AND WELFARE OF THE
WHOLE COMMUNITY. AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE IN JUNE WE AGREED
TO ADVANCE $ 219 MILLION TO THE STATES FOR WELFARE HOUSING
PURPOSES. THIS IS 26 PER CENT MORE THAN IN 1972-73,. WE
PROVIDED $ 102 MILLION IN THE BUDGET FOR HOUSING LOANS UNDER THE
DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES SCHEME THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. FINALLY, AS
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE INTRODUCED A GRADUATED FORM OF TAX DEDUCTIONS
OF INTEREST RATES FOR HOME BUYERS.
THE KEY TO ALL OUR EFFORTS FOR DECENT HOUSING IS AN
ATTACK ON THE HIGH PRICE OF LAND. IT IS INTOLERABLE THAT YOUNG
HOME BUYERS IN THIS CONTINENT SHOULD OFTEN PAY MORE FOR AN EMPTY
BLOCK THAN THEY DO FOR A HOUSE. WE ARE DETERMINED TO SEE THAT MORE
LAND IS MADE AVAILABLE FOR HOUSING AT REASONABLE PRICES, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NEGOTIATING WITH THE STATES TO ESTABLISH
LAND COMMISSIONS. THEIR PURPOSE WILL BE TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY
OF LAND AVAILABLE FOR HOUSING AND TO INCREASE THE MARKET
COMPETITION IN THE SUBDIVISION AND SALE OF HOUSING LAND. IN THE
SAME WAY, OUR NEW CITY PROJECTS, UNDERTAKEN WITH THE SUPPORT OF
THE STATES, WILL HELP ATTRACT POPULATION GROWTH AND HOUSING
DEMAND AWAY FROM THE METROPOLITAN AREAS AND INCREASE THE SUPPLY
OF LAND FOR HOUSING. I I/ U1 
-4-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ENCOURAGING THE STATES
TO ADOPT LEGISLATION FOR LAND PRICE STABILISATION, FROM READING
THE NEWSPAPERS ONE COULD BE FORGIVEN FOR BELIEVING THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ABOUT TO FREEZE LAND PRICES ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA, WE OUGHT TO BE QUITE CLEAR THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS NO POWER TO FREEZE LAND PRICES, OR EVEN TO
STABILISE THEM, THE STATES HAVE THE POWER TO DO BOTH,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS RECENTLY INTRODUCED A PRICE CONTROL ON HOME
SITES, UNDER THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SCHEME, THE FUTURE SELLING
PRICE OF HOUSING SITES IS RESTRICTED TO THEIR PRESENT MARKET
VALUE PLUS AN INFLATION FACTOR OF 7 PER CENT PER ANNUM, IN THIS
WAY, THE INCENTIVE FOR SPECULATIVE DEALING IN HOUSE SITES IS
REMOVED, NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA HAVE ALSO ANNOUNCED THEIR
INTENTION OF INTRODUCING LAND PRICE STABILISATION LEGISLATION,
WE WANT ALL STATES TO CO-OPERATE IN DEALING WITH THIS PROBLEM,
WE SHOULD NOT DELUDE OURSELVES THAT LAND PRICE INFLATION
IS CAUSED ONLY BY THE SPECULATOR, LOOKING FOR SIMPLE SCAPEGOATS
LIKE SPECULATORS WILL NOT, IN THE LONG RUN, SOLVE OUR PROBLEMS,
THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT EXCESSIVE DEMAND THROUGH LAND SPECULATION
CAUSES SOME_ OF THE LAND PRICE SPIRAL, LAND PRICE INFLATION CAN
ALSO BE CAUSED BY A REAL SHORTAGE OF HOUSING LAND, AGAIN, I
SUGGEST, THE STATE GOVERNMENTS CAN ADOPT A NUMBER OF MEASURES TO
OVERCOME THIS DEFICIENCY. THEY CAN STREAMLINE THEIR PRESENT
PLANNING MACHINERY TO REDUCE DELAYS IN THE LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS,
THEY CAN ENCOURAGE LAND OWNERS SITTING ON LAND SUITABLE FOR
SUBDIVISION TO SUBDIVIDE IT AND SELL IT, THEY CAN ASSIST IN
REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF UNPRODUCTIVE TRADING IN BLOCKS OF LAND, 
I HOPE I WILL NOT BE ACCUSED OF SELF-AGGRANDISEMENT
IF I QUOTE SOME REMARKS ONCE MADE IN THIS CONTEXT BY SIR WINSTON
CHURCHILL, HE STATED THE POSITION VERY ACCURATEL'' IN THESE
WORDS: " A LAND OWNER WHO HAPPENS TO OWN A PLOT OF LAND ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF A BIG CITY WATCHES THE BUSY POPULATION
AROUND HIM MAKING THE CITY LARGER AND MORE FAMOUS EVERY
DAY AND ALL THE WHILE HE SITS AND DOES NOTHING, ROADS
ARE MADE, SERVICES ARE IMPROVED AND WATER IS BROUGHT
FROM RESERVOIRS A HUNDRED MILES AWAY, AND ALL THE WHILE
THE LAND OWNER SITS STILL, EVERY ONE OF THESE IMPROVEMENTS
IS EFFECTED BY THE LABOUR AND THE COST OF OTHER PEOPLE,
To NOT ONE OF THESE IMPROVEMENTS DOES THE LAND OWNER, AS A
LAND OWNER, CONTRIBUTE, AND YET EVERY ONE OF THEM ENHANCES
THE VALUE OF HIS LAND, HE RENDERS NO SERVICE TO THE
COMMUNITY, HE CONTRIBUTES NOTHING TO THE GENERAL WELFARE,
HE CONTRIBUTES NOTHING TO THE PROCESS FROM WHICH HIS OWN
ENRICHMENT IS DERIVED,"
ONE OF THE DEPRESSING FEATURES OF THE PATTERN OF OUR
URBAN GROWTH IS THAT WHILE WE HAVE BUILT PLENTY OF HOUSES IN
OUTLYING AREAS OF OUR GREAT CITIES, THERE HAS BEEN NO CORRESPONDING
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SOCIAL OPPORTUNITIES,
UNLIKE OUR PREDECESSORS, WE DO NOT EQUATE HOUSING WITH SHELTER,
IT IS NOT' ENOUGH TO ERECT ACRES OF HOUSES IN SOCIAL AND
ENVIRONMENTAL WASTELANDS, WE-MUST PROVIDE MORE AESTHETIC AND
CONGENIAL SURROUNDINGS AND MORE SERVICES FOR THOSE WHO ARE
BUILDING THEIR HOMES, 
-6-
So MUCH OF WHAT IS PLEASANT AND COMFORTABLE IN
OUR LIVING ENVIRONMENT CAN BE PROVIDED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
IN THE LAST SESSION OF PARLIAMENT, WE AMENDED THE GRANTS
COMMISSION ACT TO ENABLE LOCAL'GOVERNMENT TO APPLY ON A
REGIONAL BASIS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, COUNCILS WILL BE ABLE TO DECIDE WHERE LAND SHOULD
BE DEVELOPED AND WHAT WILL BE BUILT UPON IT. LOCAL GOVERNMENT
MUST BE GIVEN THE RESOURCES IN FINANCE AND EXPERTISE TO
COPE WITH ITS INCREASING RESPONSIBILITIES IN ENVIRONMENT,
WELFARE AND HOUSING,
GOVERNMENTS, HOWEVER, CANNOT PROVIDE ALL THE AMENITIES
AND SERVICES THAT AUSTRALIANS NEED, PROGRESSIVE AND PUBLICSPIRITED
DEVELOPERS SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED TO DO MORE. THIS GREAT
HOUSING ESTATE, AND THE RESERVE BUILT UPON IT, SHOWS HOW THE
BEST AND MOST ATTRACTIVE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS CAN RESPOND TO THE
COMMUNITY'S NEEDS, TOO MANY DEVELOPERS IGNORE THESE NEEDS.
BY BRINGING HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE INTO AN AREA TO SATISFY A DEMAND
FOR HOUSING, SEVERE STRAINS ARE IMPOSED UPON SERVICES AND
AMENITIES. I SUGGEST THAT IF PRIVATE DEVELOPERS WANT PLANNING
APPROVAL FOR THEIR INITIATIVES IN SUBDIVIDED ESTATES, THEY MUST
BE PREPARED TO ACCEPT GREATER RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONSEQUENCES
-OF THEIR ACTIONS, ,/ 7 
-7-
THIS HANDSOME DISPLAY OF HOUSES IS TANGIBLE EVIDENCE
OF WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN BUILDING INDUSTRY CAN PRODUCE. THE NEW
RESERVE AND RECREATION FACILITIES WILL ADD GREATLY TO THE
ATTRACTIVENESS OF THE WHOLE AREA. I CONGRATULATE THE MANY
BUILDERS INVOLVED; I CONGRATULATE THE HOOKER CORPORATION,
NO AUSTRALIAN SHOULD FEEL THAT HOUSING OF THIS QUALITY, IN THIS
ENVIRONMENT, WITH THESE ROADS AND SERVICES, IS BEYOND HIS MEANS
OR RESOURCES, NO AUSTRALIAN SHOULD FEEL THAT A COMFORTABLE AND
WELL-BUILT HOME IN PLEASANT SURROUNDINGS IS BEYOND HIS DREAMS,
LET THIS BE THE STANDARD OF HOUSING EXEMPLIFIED IN THIS
EXHIBITION TODAY WHICH WE SEEK FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE.
L 1 



EMBARGO: 9630PM MOND) AY 17 SEPTEMBER 1973
-SPECHBY THE PRIME MINISTER MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE ANNUAL DINNER~ OF THE AUSTRALIA. N ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERSt
ASSOCIATION, LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBERRA,
MOND~ AY 17 SEPTEMBER 1973
Your convention is the second of two conventions I have
attended in the past fortnight. Yours is an annual event; the
Constitutional Convention occurs with roughly the frequency of
Halley's Comet. The last one was 82 years ago. I notice that one
of our magazines published a photograph of me on its cover the
other day, purporting to show me in the midst of that distinguished
company in a state of unaccustomed somnolence. All I can say is
that this convention promises to be a more electrifying occasion than
that one. This is by no means my first speech to a manufacturers'
dinner. Two weeks ago I spoke to the Chamber of Manufactures in
Sydney. Next Friday I shall be speaking to the South Australian
Chamber of Manufactures, and next Monday to the Heavy Engineering
Manufacturers' Association here in this hotel.
Now whatever you may think of the Government, I can hardly
be accused, in these circumstances, of snubbing the manufacturers.
My only fear is that you will grow weary of hearing the same message
five times in succession. So let me assure you that tonight's speech
is a completely new model there's no wasteful proliferation of
speeches in qy department. My real difficulty is that two weeks from
tonight I shall be speaking yet again to the Chamber of Manufactures
in Brisbane. I shall have to tell them what I have already told
manufacturers in the southern States. You will understand, of course,
that it always takes a little longer to get our message through to
Queensland. If I may be permitted a truism, gentlemen, we live in changing
times. When I spoke earlier this year to the Metal Trades Industries
Association in Melbourne, we were about to introduce the 25% cut in
tariffs which we announced in July. When I spoke to the Chamber of
Manufactures in Sydney just over a fortnight ago, we had just brought
in our Budget. Now, as I speak to you tonight, we have just announced
a further revaluation of the dollar, a new policy by the Reserve Bank
towards Government securities and interest rates, and, more recently,
our intention to submit to the Australian people a referendum to give
the national Government power over prices. You can see the hazards
of going to too many businessmen's dinners. Basic to all our economic
measures are two clear and simple purposes, two consistent and
overriding aims to stimulate a more vigorous and competitive climate
in Australian industry, and to stem inflationary pressures in the
economy0 
-2-
Let me speak first about inflation. One thing I caution you
against and caution the Au stralian people against is a sterile
obsession with inflation such as our opponents seem determined to
foster. Inflation is not the sole issue for the Australian Government;
the be-all and end-all of economic management. Exaggerated fears may
be as damaging as inflation itself by encouraging defeatism and
timidity, be encouraging a needless, heedless rush to put up prices
against the vague possibility of competitors doing likewise. I would
hate to see the price structure become as irrational, as psychologically
vulnerable, as fickle a feature of our economic life as dare I say itthe
share market. I appeal to you to keep the whole issue of prices
in perspective, to bear in mind that Governments throughout the world
face the same problem that we do, that my Government is determined and
pledged to do all in its power to restrain inflationary pressures0
We shall do this with or without the assistance of the States, with
or without the assistance of our opponents. But we shall do it, I
believe, with the assistance and concurrence of the Australian people.
In our attack on inflation I want to stress one thing above
all: we are pledged to a program of reform and renovation of
Australian society, we were elected to carry out that program, and
we shall carry it out steadily, steadfastly as we have been doing
since last December. It is all very well for our opponents to talk
of curbing inflation. Their last and most notorious attempt to do so
was the Budget of 1971/ 72. Statesmanslike as I always am on these
occasions, I forbear to remind you who was the author of that document.
But you all remember its consequences: stagnation, a paltry growth
rate of 2 or the worst unemployment for 10 years, and, when our
predecessors left office, the highest rate of inflation for 20 years.
That was our inheritance. That was our lesson. You will all remember
how my colleagues and I, when we were in opposition, were regularly
accused by the previous Government of " calamity howling". Yet no one
hawls calamity more than they do. At least they give us calamities
worth howling about: We now have a strong demand for labour: growth
at 7% and rising; and record profits. We have combined this strong
and basically healthy economic situation with the most effective and
far reaching program of economic reform ever undertaken in this country.
We shall not, however, fight inflation with the methods of our opponents.
We shall not throw away people's jobs, we shall not resort to clumsy
stop-go economics,, we shall not renounce our commitments to the people
of this nation and especially to the poor, the children, the sick,
the migrants, the city-dwellers, the low and middle-income earners
whose interests have been neglected so shamefully for so long.
The weapons we have chosen to fight inflation are the same
weapons with which we hope to achieve more competition and greater
efficiency in Australian industry. There is one other weapon, however,
which the Australian Government lacks, and which we shall ask the
people to grant us. That is power to control prices. Our opponents
are rece-nt converts to the idea of a prices and incomes policy. Not
long ago they were saying such policies wouldn't work. For myself, I
frankly confess that I have always had reservations about the value of
price control powers reservations I have publicly acknowledged and
explained. But I have no doubt and I believe the people will have
no doubt that it is intolerable that Australia should be the only
country in the western world whose Government is denied such powers,
and which cannot use them if the need arises. Equally I have no doubt
that if such powers are to be applied, they must be immediate,
unchallenged, uniform in their application. 
-3-
The States have these powers. They have refused to exercise
them; they have refused to refer them to us, either temporarily or
permanently. They won't use them; they won't let anyone else use
them. And with their allies in the national Parliament, they propose
to campaign against the very suggestion that the people employers,
employees, housewives, businessmen, manufacturers should be allowed
to decide whether the national Government should have the powers
or not. Yet these are the Premiers, these are the parties, who
protest about inflation and whip up people's fears about it.
If I were more cynical about these matters, I might be
tempted to believe that our opponents had a vested interest in
inflation, and hoped to confound the Government and weaken its
nerve, I am sorry to disappoint them. We will not be dismayed.
We will not be deflected. We will beat inflation, and beat it with
measures that are fair, constructive and humane.
The prices referendum bill which we introduced in Parliament
today will be a test of the good faith and sincerity of our
opponents. I hear some of them say that we ought to include incomes
in the referendum. Well, of course, incomes are already fixed for
the vast majority of Australians either by negotiation or arbitratio n.
Apparently there are some people, until recently quite vociferous in
defence of the arbitration system, who now lack faith in the ability
and judgement of the Arbitration Commission. But let that pass. I
have no doubt that if the people of Australia give us power to control
prices, we can count, if necessary, on the responsible cooperation of
the trade union movement in restraining wages and incomes. I give that
assurance, Let there be no mistake about the persistence or the consistency
with which I have approached the question of power over prices. At the
opening of the Constitutional Convention just two weeks ago I first
invited the Premiers to refer to the national Parliament the powers
held by the States. I explained that the Australian Government could
seek a constitutional change by referendum, but that this would take
some months, depending upon the behaviour of the Senate. I said:
" The Parliament can obtain the power by reference, by some
or all State Parliaments. That is something which could
be done in a matter of weeks. The reference of power could
be permanent or temporary. If, however, the Governments
in the two great States of New South Wales and Victoria,
Governments which currently have a majority in both Houses
of their Parliaments, decline to introduce a Bill, then
the reference would be ineffective. I venture to say that
without New South Wales and Victoria, it would be a largely
futile exercise, while, with those two States alone referring,
it could be made effective throughout Australia."
On the following day, the Tuesday, I appealed again for a
reference of these powers. It was all too clear, however, that
nothing in the private or public responses of the Premiers of
New South Wales, Victoria or Queensland gave any room for hope that
they would do so. The position then is this:
We have had a Premiers' Conference on inflation; we have had a
Constitutional Convention. The States in this context, of course, 
-4-
I am referring to the anti-Labor States have bluntly refused to
budge or co-operate. It is fruitless to ask them again. We can
only appeal to the people. If our bill is passed this week, we can
have a referendum within two months. Ar~ d by Christmas, I assure you,
we shall have passed legislation to stabilise the growth of land
prices throughout Australia. That will be our first and most important
action if the referendum is carried.
The measures we have taken against inflation revaluation,
tariff cuts will have several important consequences. They will
help keep down the price of imports, they will increase the supply
of goods within Australia, they will reduce any artificial stimulus
to capital inflow, they will stimulate competition. I suggest that
Australian industry, because of strong domestic and world demand,
and buoyant conditions in the rural sector, is well placed to absorb
the effects of our revaluatio ns. Those industries which have special
difficulties we stand ready to assist. And of course, we are assisting
industry in much more positive and enduring ways.
Look back on our decisions and actions since last December,
and you will find our record replete with schemes and initiatives
to benefit industry. Our Budget provided an estimated outlay of
$ 145 million for assistance to industry in 1973-74, $ 34 million more
than actual expenditure in the last financial year. We have increased
assistance under the Industrial Research and Development Grant Scheme
from $ 14 million to $ 16.8 million. We are encouraging higher standards
of industrial design. We have provided $ 1.83 million for better
apprenticeship training. We are developing new manpower policies to
help industry adjust to changing needs and conditions. We are strengthening
the Australian Industry Development Corporation to enable it to
play its full part in developing local industry and keeping it in
Australian hands. We are establishing an Industries Assistance
Commission to coordinate all forms of assistance to industry and to
open up the process of assistance to full public scrutiny. We are
setting up industry panels bringing together employers, employees,
consumers and Government to advise on a whole range of industrial
problems. I do not pretend for a moment that our reforms will be painless,
or that our plans to streamline and invigorate Australian industry do
not involve quite basic structural changes and new attitudes on the part
of us all. It is precisely because I have confidence in the -strength
of indu-stry as well as its good sense and public-spiritedness
that I believe our reforms will be welcomed and understood. Let me,
however, give an example of the sort of practice my Government cannot
tolerate. You will forgive me for choosing an instance that is
uncomfortably, distressingly, close to home. I refer to an agreement
made between five Australian manufacturers for the 12 months to last
April. The agreement raised to an agreed level the minimum price of
Japanese fans exported to Australia. It was entered into after
negotiations between your own Association and the Japan Electrical
Manufacturers' Association. The Commissioner of Trade Practices
investigated the agreement and referred to it in these terms in
his 1972-73 annual report: 00./ 5 
" I notified the parties that I considered the agreement
was contrary to the public interest and should not be renewed when
it expired in April 1973; the agreement had the effect of increasing
the price of Japanese fans to Australian consumers and weakening
external competition without any inquiry by the Tariff Board which
has the responsibility of recommending the level of protection to
which Australian manufacturers may be entitled against imports; in
addition the agreement aggravated a shortage in the total supply
of fans available to the Australian market which occurred in the
unusually hot summer season."
That is what the Commissioner of Trade Practices had to say,
I am glad to record the fact that although your association tdisagreed
with the Commissioner in good faith, the agreement in question was not
renewed. Now I didn't come here to give lectures or to rake over past
history, but I would be less than candid if I failed to make it clear
to you that such agreements as that will not be tolerated by my
Government. Under the restrictive practices legislation we shall
introduce, that agreement would have been illegal. Under our
legislation, consumers will not have to wait while the Commissioner
investigates and makes a report. We shall take action to prohibit
a great range of restrictive practices directly and immediately.
Mr. Chairman, I have spoken bluntly to you. I know you would
not want-from me, or my Government, anything other than straight talk
and square dealing. Let me now tell you with equal candour, with
equal conviction what my hopes are for your industry, and for all
industry. First, we want ready and open communication with you. We
want to hear from you and be involved in your problems. Next, we want
your continued prosperity. Our whole program depends upon a healthy
and prosperous business community. We want to encourage the
transformation of weak, dependant industries into vigorous and more
self-reliant ones, to help industries withstand the pressures of
national change and international competition without the need for
inordinate Government support. We want to encourage more competition,
more rational use of resources, lower prices for the consumer. We see
the growth of sound and healthy industry as basic to the growth of a
modern industrial economy.
Finally, I ask you to keep in mind your basic strength, your
real and growing prosperity0 This year your sales have risen strongly,
your exports have increased, your orders are high. It is fair to say
that, despite rising costs and other pressures, Australian industry
is in better condition today than it has ever been. What better time
to undertake with the new Government, the lasting and far-reaching
reforms that will ensure greater strength and prosperity in years to
come? 



EMBARGO: 8 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AT THE
GENERAL MOTORS HOLDEN DINING HALL, WOODVILLE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
FRIDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 1973
once already this week I have had occasion to draw attention
to the remarkable number of manufacturers' dinners I have been
eating, or will eat in the space of a fortnight five in all.
Manufacturers well know the way to my heart.
These eating engagements are, of course, also speaking
engagements. I am happy to speak to Australian manufacturers
because, quite frankly, I think we have a good story to tell.
I believe there is no section of the Australian business community
which shares greater common interests, more common ground with the
present Australian Government than Australia's manufacturing
industries. It is an historical fact that the strength of Australian
manufactures and the strength of the Australian Labor movement have
grown together. This has been no accident. It is of the essence
of the political and industrial development of this nation; and
this community of interest between Labor and industry was never
greater than at this time in our history when we have an Australian
Labor Government.
Let me from the first get down to the essentials of our
community of interest. They are essentials which transcend, I
believe, the criticisms you may have of my Government in detail
or for that matter, which I may have of you in detail. To mention
these great areas of agreement is at the same time to set the present
economic condition of Australia and the Australian Government's
plans for the economy in a true perspective. It is timely this week
to do so.
First, the Australian Government has an unqualified commitment
to genuine full employment. However acute our perception of the
social and economic evils of inflation may be, we are not prepared
to seek a solution through the weapon of massive unemployment.
In Australia, massive unemployment means empty or half-used factories.
It means, whenever that weapon has been tried in this nation,' our
loss, your bankruptcy, the retarding and sometimes even the enof
your careers as businessmen. There is no matter on which the people
we represent and the industries you represent should share so strong
a common view and a common determination. And that means that
whatever measures we take to deal with the day-to-day problems of
economic management, even when those problems have a high
international component, they will not be solved by us at least
by creating significant unemployment or closing your factories. 
Secondly, we are committed to a national economy running
at the highest level of its capacity and real productivity.
We are a Government of growth. That means that the manufacturer
and the investor can plan with complete assurance on the maintenance
of the highest level of growth. We cannot be content with the two
or three per cent growth prevailing in the year before our election.
We need to sustain and, if possible, surpass the seven per cent
already achieved, not just through our efforts in the last nine
months but through your efforts and the efforts of your employees.
Thirdly, you need, as we need, a high level of real wages
and a high level of real purchasing power. Your prosperity and
our success depend alike on the ability of the consumers
overwhelmingly employees and their dependants to buy your goods
and pay into our revenues.
Fourthly, we have a vested interest in your achieving fair
profits. We need the growth which the investment of your profits
brings; and quite frankly we need healthy taxes from your healthy
profits. As to these last two matters wages and profits you may
recall that in my policy speech last November, I acknowledged that
our program of vast social reform could only work successfully
within a framework of strong, uninterrrupted growth. The expectation
of reasonable profits is as much a factor in achieving that growth
as is the reasonable anticipation on the part of employees that their
real standards will rise.
Fifthly, there is the overwhelming importance to the wellbeing
of all Australians of our social program itself, our social
goals, our social priorities. It's true that by the simplest
accounting, our program involves an increased allocation of the
national resources to the public sector. The whole thrust of our
program is towards public initiatives, initiatives that in modern
societies are either taken by governments, or not taken by anybody
at all. But it should be left there. It is an absurdly oversimplified
proposition to suggest that any increase in public
activity, public initiative, any widening of the public sector is
automatically and inevitably at the expense of the private sector.
For example, this year, in our Budget, we gave education top
priority. It constitutes the fastest growing component of the
Budget. We will provide $ 843 million for education in 1973/ 74, an
increase of $ 404 million or 92 per cent on last year. But
governments do not manufacture the equipment, make the bricks,
erect the buildings, install the fittings which compose a school.
When governments spend on these items they provide new investment
opportunities for the private investor, new scope for the private
manufacturer. And the same opportunities apply in our proposals
in the cities, in hospitals, in transport, in housing. When
governments take initiatives where none existed before, it is
private enter prise, private manufacturing which share in the first
fruits of such initiatives. 
-3-
And to those five great imperatives, these goals, these
objectives in which we share common interests I shall add a
sixth a thoroughly political one. You have a vested interest
in continuing prosperity of South Australia. So have I. I cannot
survive politically, my Government cannot survive, without
prosperity in this State a State which sends seven Labor of her
eleven members to the House of Representatives.
I won't go through the list of specific benefits which-accrue
to South Australia under the Budget and other arrangements made with
the South Australian Government during the year. I may say that
total paym~ nts to the South Australian Government in 1973/ 74 are
estimated at $ 385 million. That represents $ 320 per head compared
with an average payment to all States of $ 270 per head. The benefits
of increased. consumption in this State are benefits which you, as the
State's manufacturers, can share.
These are the things you can bank on, literally bank on,
invest on, plan on, with assurance, with surety, with confidence.
You can bank on-full employment; you can bank on an expanding
economy, you can bank on higher consuming power, you can bank on
the continuance of splendid profits; you can bank on growing
opportunities of the private sector to benefit from the growing
initiatives of government. These are sure and certain things.
Any prudent investor should be able to see these certainties and
seize the opportunities.
Quite frankly, I can only express contempt for the behaviour
of the Stock Exchange last week. The stock market apparently
suddenly discovered inflation. The Government cannot be responsible
for the masochism of the stock market, or be concerned about its
self-inflicted wounds.
I took the trouble to glance at the business pages of the
Advertiser this week. What do I find?
" John Martin Peak Profit and Pay-Out Surprise hoist in
dividend rate by Hills industries Hunter Douglas dividend
up after profit upsurge... . Orlit exceeds expectations earns
15.3 per cent.... . Earnings peak for food group."
This I am asked to believe is the picture of an economy
bludgeoned to its knees by the onslaughts of the socialists in
Canberra! It is a nonsense; and I ask you, as the solid
manufacturers of South Australia, people with a-stake in the
prosperity of your State, of your nation, as well as your own
business, not to have a bar of this masochism, this schizophrenia,
this psychological sabotage. It is in this context the context
of a strong, an expanding economy that I put some of our specific
problems and the Government's handling of those problems. 
-4-
We have acknowledged from the day we took office that
inflation was the major problem of economic management. On the
December, the first report I made to the nation, I said
" In particular, my Government will spare no effort to restore
genuine full employment to this country. Yet we must do this
while continuing a battle to contain inflation. We are under no
illusions about the difficulty of this double task". That was
less than three weeks after the election. So inflation is not
something the Government has just discovered, just started to worry
about. It is just a statement of fact to say that most of the
additional price increases which have occurred in Australia since
we took office have been the result of the international transmission
to this country of inflationary pressures being experienced in
practically every developed country where a free or mixed economy
operates. But we immediately began to take action to curtail these
international pressures. We appreciated the value of the currency
by 7 per cent in December; we didn't go down when the United States
dollar went down and we revalued again by a further 5 per cent
in September. Those actions generated great criticisms. Where is
the foretold disaster?
Then, of course, we cut tariffs by 25 per cent in July.
Let me say this: the 25 per cent tariff cut is not going to
produce the 45,000 to 50,000 which " Industry News", the organ of
your associated Chambers of Manufactures, told us to expect.
The Government set aside $ 25 million for special assistance
to industries and persons who might be victimized by our decision.
The latest figures I have two months after the decision is that
one Australian factory not in South Australia has sought
assistance. The total number of employees claiming special
unemployment benefits provided for tariff cut victims is some
throughout Australia. There were 13 in South Australia.
Three still remain to be placed in new jobs. Catastrophe!
Disaster' Doom.
I do not want it to be thought for a minute that I am cavalier
about these matters, particularly as they may affect manufacturers
in South Australia. I very well know the vulnerability of South
Australia's great industries to changes in demand in your eastern
markets. No policy decision of any government. I lead will result
in the dislocation of South Australian industry. I give you that
unequivocal reassurance. As I told the people in a national
broadcast on the 22nd July; " This Government did not restore full
employment in this country merely to take it away again, even from
a section of the workers."
We are, nonetheless, striving for more efficient, more
competitive Australian industry, throughout Australia. It is
not enough to say that because an industry exists in a particular
place, it has a divine right to that existence in that particular
place for all time. To achieve our aims of a more competitive,
more efficient industry, we have instituted a whole range of measuresthe
tariff review, removal of restrictive practices, new manpower
policies, the establishment of the Industries Assistance Commission.
It is clear that if we are to combat inflation even moderately
better than most comparable countries we shall have to cut away
some of the industrial fat. It is, of course, going to be a massive
task to balance these objectives with our equally determined effort
to minimise hardship to both employers and employees. The Government
is equal to that task. 
I want to introduceapare political note not a party
political note. But it is a matter which I think concerns all
Australians. The politics of Australia have for many years been
conducted in a atmosphere of virtual permanent electioneering.
This is not only because of the frequency of our elections, though,
of course, that is a factor. Since the two Houses of the national
parliament were thrown out of alignment in 1963, there have been
national elections virtually every e-ighteen months. In thirteen
years that I have been either deputy or Leader of the Labor Party
I have fought eight national campaigns. But there is more to i~ t
than that. For many years past ( we might date it from the death
of Harold Holt) there has been a deep element of instability and
unpredictability in our national political life. We have had five
Prime Ministers in seven years. As a consequence, we have lived
psychologically always on the verge of imminent political change.
This has not been good for Australia; it has not made for good
economic or political management. I want to put this very
seriously and frankly to you. It may be that the next elections
will involve an election for both Houses. There must be a
Senate election not much later than April or May next year.
But the timing of an election involving the I-ouse of Representatives
is a matter for our judgement. It is giving away no secrets, it
is a simple statement of political fact that I shall recommend a
dissolution of the House of Representatives at the time of maximum
advantage to the Government. Therefore, the simple poli-tical fact
of life in Australia is that the present Government is going to
be around for a considerable timi-e not less than two years.
Now two years is a long time in the life of a nation such as ours
and certainly a long time in business planning. it is unreal for
business to take the attitude that: the Government could be
sabotaged or undermined without far greater datmage to business
itself than to the Government. The Government itself in its broad
objectives and I believe in the specific measures it takes to
achieve those broad objectives is, an eminently predic-table government.
Wise business, prudent business, sensible manufacturers will
acknowledge that it is better to live'. with and plan with and
co-operate with a basically predictable government, one which will
be the government of Australia for a considerable time to come,
than to sulk in desperate futility in resentment against the
judgement of the people last December about how and by whom they
would be governed for at least tho ensuing three years. 



EMBARGO: 9.00 p. m. 24 September 1973 Check against delivery
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, TO
THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE HEAVY ENGINEERING MANUFACTURERS'
ASSOCIATION LAKESIDE HOTEL, CANBERRA, MONDAY, 24 SEPTEMBER 1973
Some of you may remember, when we brought down our
Budget, certain commentators describing it as Phase I of the
Government's economic policy. I suppose this occasion will be
branded as Phase IV of our manufacturing policy. Yours is
the fourth manufacturers' dinner I have attended in the past few
weeks. Now at last I am dealing with the heavies.
Let me begin by proclaiming the fundamental community
of interest between the Labor Government and your branch of
industry. Rather, let me proclaim it in your own words.
In one of your recent annual reports I found this passage:
" Since its formation in 1968, the Heavy Engineering manufacturers'
Association has consistently advocated Government-industry
co-operation as the best means of attaining the national
objectives of development, full employment and prosperity."
I accept those words as an accurate statement of our
common policy our shared objectives, our shared methods.
I should add that my Government has been pursuing the same
objectives since its formation in 1972. So we are both, in a
way, fledgling organisations. You can be proud of your
Association's achievements in the past six years. I am equally
proud of the Government's record in the past 10 months.
I return to those three objectives again " Development,
full employment, prosperity". First, consider employment.
There is nothing more central to our common needs, to our common
philosophy, than the maintenance of full employment. You
cannot afford the waste and losses which large-scale
unemployment inevitably brings. We cannot afford them either;
nor can be afford, or tolerate, the social axd political
consequences. We inherited the worst unemployment for 10 years.
We have restored full employment in less than 10 months.
Second, prosperity. I venture to suggest that Australia
is more prosperous today than it has ever been. In saying this,
I do not overlook the vast areas of poverty that remain for
many of our people, and I acknowledge that for such Australians
the very word " prosperity" has a hollow ring. Nevertheless, it
is true that for most of us consumer spending is running at
record levels; profits are higher than ever; world demand
for our exports is immensely strong. And nowhere is this healthy
situation more' manifest than in manufacturing industry. In short,
we have record prosperity. / 2 
-2-
Your third criterion is development. Let me assure
you that the Government regards the development of strong,
healthy Australian industries as a fundamental, long-term
objective. It is one of our essential and unqualified
commitments and it is reflected, I believe, in every major
policy announcement, every major economic decision we have taken
since coming to office. We are a Government of growth. Our
success, perhaps our survival, certainly the achievement of our
basic social objectives, depends upon the maintenance of strong
and prosperous local industries. We need your strength, we
need your growth, we need your prosperity.
I think you will agree on reflection perhaps even
my friend Senator Cotton will agree that our incentive in
this matter is far more powerful than it was for our predecessors.
It is precisely because we are pledged to certain reforms, to
a program of social change and renovation which the Australian
people entrusted us to carry out, that we are more than ever
determined to maintain and develop the underlying strength of
our industrial economy. Does anyone imagine that my Government
of all governments can be indifferent to the needs of industry,
and epecially of your industry an industry that provides
the know-how and the muscle for important development developmental
projects, for construction, for transport, for shipping or
pipelines, for power supply and generation, for water conservation
projects, for northern development, for vital defence industries
( like light aircraft) that we are determined Australia shall
maintain for herself? ( Now that a certain by-election is
behind us, I might even mention such things as airports.) Of
course your industry's prosperity is essential to us, essential
to our plans, our vision, our whole philosophy. You are the
businessmen, and yours are the industries, that will be needed
to bring many of our plans to fruition.
I give you this further assurance tonight: Nothing
my Government does to correct our economic difficulties either
those we have inherited or those we have imported will be
allowed to jeopardise the fundamental strength of Australian
industry. The very opposite is true. The whole burden of our
attack on inflationary pressures has been through measures
designed to strengthen industry, streamline it, to build up its
efficiency and sharpen its competitive edge. We inherited
a pattern of growing inflation. The great bulk of that inflation
has been due to factors and pressures imported from countries
where inflation is running at a high rate. It is as much an
international as a national problem. There is no simple solution.
But faced with this situation, what did we do? We did not throw
up our hands in despair or bludgeon the economy to a standstill. / 3 
-3-
We took prompt and responsible action. We initiated a series
of carefully timed and related steps designed to increase our
level of imports, build up the supply of goods and reduce
domestic prices. We are now seeking a further weapon from the
people direct power over prices. Depending on the attitude
of the Senate, we shall submit that proposal to a referendum
of the people before Christmas or as early as possible in the
new year. That has been our approach a steady, responsible,
coherent attack on the roots of the problem. How easy it
would have been for us, faced with an inflationary problem,
to act as other governments have done, and throw thousands of
Australians out of work. How easy to take refuge in
conventional remedies, despite their futility in the past!
But what would be the effect on industry if we did? Loss of
production, half-empty factories, businesses driven to the wall.
Your industry, as you are all painfully aware, is only now
recovering from the effects of the most recent attempt to
restrain inflation by such means. Again, how easy it would
have been for me and the Treasurer to yield to the clamour of
our critics, the editorialists, the airmchair propagandists,
and cut back on public spending in the Budget. Think of the
plaudits we would have received for acting responsibly. But
think of the consequences. We would have totally abrogated
the trust placed in us by the people. We would have denied
to industry, to you, to manufacturers, the great long-term
opportunities that our program offers for investment and growth.
Let me explain those opportunities. I have pointed
out to manufacturers on other occasions that it is an absurdly
over-simplified proposition to suggest than any increase in
public activity, any widening of the public sector, is
automatically at the expense of the private sector. For example,
in our Budget this year we gave top priority to Education. We
shall provide $ 843 million for Education in 1973-74, an increase
of 92%. But governments do not manufacture the equipment,
make the bricks, install the fittings that make a school.
When governments spend on these items they provide new investment
opportunities for the private investor, new scope for the private
manufacturer. The same opportunities apply to our proposals
in the cities, in hospitals, in transport, in development projects.
When governments take initiatives where none existed before
initiatives that would not otherwise be taken at all it is
private investment and private industry which share in the
benefits of such initiatives.
I have not yet mentioned one great quality of your
industry that commends it to the new Government. That is:
you are an Austrdlian industry, you are overwhelmingly Australianowned
and controlled. You exemplify what we hope to achieve in
other sections of the economy: greater Australian ownership
and control of our industries and resources. Moreover, as you
yourselves have pointed out, the very platform of my party / 4 
recognises the importance of heavy engineering in the achievement
of our national goals. Section 8 states that the party's policy
is to encourage nationally the scientific development of our
national resources through the use of our raw materials and
human skills in the fields of metallurgy, metal fabrication and
engineering. This is to be achieved through Government and
private co-operation in the development of national industries
for the greatest advantage to Australia. Section 5 of the
Platform provides that the Government will protect industry by
whatever means are necessary after thorough examination by an
independent government authority.
Many of the decisions we have taken reflect this
awareness of your special importance, your central role in
Australia's future. We established at the outset a new Department
of Secondary Industry, and, within that Department, an Engineering
Industries Division. You have always emphasised the need for
co-operation between government and industry; so have we.
My colleague Dr Cairns has announced his proposal for " industry
panels" to bring together representatives of industry, government,
the trade unions and consumers to advise on the development
of industries. Your Association has had discussions with
the Department of Secondary Industry on setting up a panel in
the area of heavy engineering. We will strengthen the Australian
Industry Development Corporation and free it from restraints,
to enable it to play its full role in developing Australian
industry and keeping it in Australian hands.
I acknowledge the anxieties you have experienced
recently over our tariff proposals. The Tariff Board completed
a long review of your industry early last year. Our predecessors
accepted the Board's recommendation for protection on the grounds
that you are an efficient, economic industry and a national
asset. I should not wish to dispute that finding for a moment;
I wholeheartedly endorse it. But in-view of your application
for a review of tariff levels in the light of our currency
realignments, I do not wish to anticipate what future assistance
your industry may receive or deserve. As you know, we have
decided to transform the Tariff Board into an Industries Assistance
Commission. It will co-ordinate all forms of aid to industry
and improve the allocation of resources among industries throughout
Australia. It will throw open the whole process of assistance
to public scrutiny. It would be unfair to mislead you at this
stage with predictions of what the new Commission will or will
not do. But I assure you of this: no section ot industry ranks
higher in our estimation, or higher in our priorities, than yours.
I know the measures we have taken against inflation
two revaluations, our 25% tariff cut, our policy on interest
rates are not necessarily the measures you would have chosen
yourselves. Yet I suggest that Australian industry, operating
within a basically sound economy, is in a strong position to
withistand the effects of our measures, and to respond to them
in positive and beneficial ways. As you know, we have undertaken
that the Government will assist any industry adversely affected
by our revaluations or tariff cuts. We have set aside $ 25m to 
help industries and employees hurt by our tariff measures.
The latest information I have is that one Australian factory
has claimed assistance. The total number of employees
claiming benefits as a result of our measures is 25 throughout
Australia. Three still remain to be placed in new jobs. That
is how disastrous our measures have been to date. So let us
be realistic. If you have worries or grievances we expect
to hear from you. But we want to hear of specific and detailed
cases. We do not want vague and generalised forecasts of
unspecified calamities.
There is no point in my coming before you pretending
that nothing has changed since last December, or that Government
decisions on which you based your plans and expectations last
year will remain unaltered. You know as well as I do that much
has changed. We have a new department with a new and able
Minister at its head, dedicated to your welfare. New positions
are being created and filled in that department. We are
establishing new machinery for consultation and co-operation
between government and industry. We are establishing new
machinery to assist industry and assess its needs.
I ask you to accept that all our reforms are designed
with one purpose: to strengthen Australian industry. Not to
benefit me, or the Government, but to benefit you and
ultimately the Australian people. We have a new Government,
a vigorous Government, a Government that is likely to be around
for some years to come. I suggest that you accept that reality
and work with us, beside us, for tChe welfare and progress of
our nation. Because you are prudent men, realistic men, and
in the last resort, courageous men, I know it is not in your
nature to shirk the challenge of change and opportunity.,
If I merely wanted to offer you comfort and reassurance, I would
simply remind you, as I have already done, that we have your
interests at heart and will safeguard your security. But I
do more than that. I invite you to accept that our plans for
Australian industry, undertaken now in the context of a sound
and expanding prosperity, will lead us forward to a richer,
more progressive, more exciting future. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO TH' ANNUAL DINNER OF THE QUEENSLAND CHAMBER OF MIANUFACTU] REPS,
LENT4OJIS PLAZA HOTEL, BRISBANE, MOLJDAY 1ST OCTOBER, 1973
During the past few weeks I have spoken on five occasions
to business leaders throughout Australia. I certainly intend no
slight to Queensland by the fact that this gathering is the last
of the series. On the contrary, you will receive the distillation
of all the accumulated wisdom of my travels. You may justly call
this my summing up, my final address to the jury.
In everything I have had to say to the business community
and especially to manufacturers I Lhave sought to omphasise one
bas: ic fact about my Government. And it is this: We are committed
to your prosperity, we need you. 1e need your success, your
growth, your co.-operation.
I have to confess that this is partly a vested interest.
And, as such, it is the more compelling. The fact is, as I
have always stressed, that if my Government is to bring fruition to
our ambitious plans for Australia's welfare and development, we can
do it only in the context of an expanding economy, a buoyant and
prosperous private sector. We were elected on a platform of
reform; we will stand or fall depending on how successfully that
mandate is discharged. We need business, we need industry, we need
men like yourselves, to help us to discharge it. You are our
in. l. insensable allies.
So that is my first unequivocal assurance to you. Whenever
you hear people say that the Government is indifferent, or even
hostile, to the business world, you will realise how shallow, how
short--sighted, how politically naive, such a judgement must be.
Of course you will have criticisms to make of the Government in
detail, just as the Government may have particular criticisms of
business or industry. That is a fact of life, and a fact of
politics, whatever Government may be in power. 1ut I ask you
to remember that our underlying commitment is to the maintenance
of strong and prosperous local industries. That commitment has been
reflected in every major policy announcement, every major economic
decision we have taken since coming to office.
To illustrate my point, I mention some of the measures we
have chosen to fight inflation. Rather, I shall mention first one
3f the methods we have not chosen. We have not chosen to fight
inflation by creating massive unemployment. Yours are the industries
that would suffer most from such measures as indeed, you have
already suffered to your great cost. I hardly need to remind you
of the losses entailed by empty or half-used factories. So we will
not attack inflation by destroying jobs. That is not simply an
ideological commitment to the wage earner, though of course such a
commitment is central to our perception of social . justice. It is
a commitment no less realistic, to your welfare as well. We will not
expose Australian industry to stop-go fluctuations in demand which can
destroy its efficiency and inventives. As part of our attack on
inflation we have created conditions in which most industries can
produce to capacity and benefit from the lower unit costs which
result. 
-2
So let me spell out the essentials of our community of interest.
' Full employment is one, and in the past 10 months we have restored
genuine full employment. Next, we are committed to growth, to a
national economy geared to the highest level of its capacity and
real productivity. That means the manufacturer and the investor
can plan-with complete assurance on the maintenance of the highest
possible level of economic growth, and don't forget that in the
past 10 months we have lifted our national growth rate to a near
record 7%.
N~ ext, we both need a high level of real wages and real
purchasing power. Then again, we have a vested interest in your
achieving fair profits. We need the growth which the investment of
such profits brings. And finally, we believe there are enormous
opportunities for manufacturers, for prudent investors, in the
initiatives we have taken to enlarge the public sector of the
economy. When Governments take initiatives where none were taken
before as we have in the cities, in education, in transport,
in housing it is private enterpris e and privato mnufacturing
which share in the fruits of these initiatives.
There is another message I have tried to convey to the
businessmen of this country. It is one of pure optimism, or if
you like, of self-congratulation. I ask you to remember that our
economy is basically strong and healthy, and that jusinoss is
currently enjoying a buoyant prosperity. We hear a good deal
about anxiety or uncertainty; we hear little about the real
tangible strength of the Australian economy at this time. After
all, manufactuers should know this better than anyone.
Niowhere is our prosperity more apparent than in manufacturing.
Consumer spending is running at very high levels.
In the June quarter the level of activity rose in almost
every major area of manufacturing industry. Sales rose by 12%
over March 1973 and a further increase of 15% is expected
in the December half-year. In the June quarter capital expenditure
rose by 23% over March, and orders were 11% above the already high
March values. So whatever doubts you may have about the future
let there be no doubts about the present. We are thriving.
I know that for many of you the Government' s approach to
industry may seem to be one of denial, rather than generosity;
of exposure to chill winds, rather than protection. I acknowledge
the anxieties you have experienced over our tariff cuts and
revaluations, though I must say frankly that we h~ ve seen little
evidence so far of any harmful effects of these measures, either
on industry or the workforce. And I am confident that the measures
were justified by considerations of the national economic interest
that you, as businessmen, will recognise. I acknowledge also that,
for some of you, our proposals for reforming the tariff machinery
for establishing an Australian Industry Development Corporation,
for legislating in far--reaching fashion for consumer protection and
against restrictive practices, may seem part o~ f some complex and
oppresive pattern of interference or intimidation. That is what
our critics would like you to believe. They arc wrong. / 3 
3
It is my purpose to assure you, to convince you, that they
are wrong. In the first place, we have undertaken that the
Government will assist any industry adversely affected by our
revaluations in tariff cuts. As to our long-term reforms, I
stress that their purpose is not to weaken industry but to
strengthen it still further to meet whatever challenges may be
posed by international events or economic conditions at home.
I am talking now of industries that are genuinely strong,
genuinely responsive, competitive, flexible and efficient.
A weak industry is not strong-whatever governments may do to
help it. In the long run, it will not survive. Nhat we aim
to do, in all our measures for encouraging and assisting industry,
is to make sure that efficient and well-run industries not
only survive but prosper.
So I give you this assurance: nothing we do, either in our
fight against inflation or in our general economic policies,
will do anything to damage the underlying strength and prosperity
of Australian industry. We are pledged to your growth and progress.
I do not see anything in our announced policies that industry
should fear. In a sense, our plans for consumer protection, for
industry assistance, for banning restrictive trading practices
far-reaching and important as they are-involve no more than logical
extensions of what are now accepted principles. If you take our
legislation on restrictive practices, for example, you will see
that what we are doing is directly prohibiting certain practices
instead of leaving them to be restrained separately after timeconsuming
inquiries. We have not so much a new objective, as a new
and more direct means of achieving it. At the very least you will
concede that our appraoch will eliminate a great deal of uncertainty.
As the influence of this legislation spreads we can expect a sharper
and more competitive spirit to emerge in the economy, with industry
quicker to respond to changes in the market and to new opportunities
in general. ' This must benefit everyone.
Similarly, with our attitude to industry assistance.
We are by no means abolishing the accepted principle that deserving
industries should be assisted to develop and flourish. Far from it.
What we are doing is extending this principle to all industries
not just manufacturing and ensuring that the whole process of
assistance is subject to the most rigorous and extensive public
scrutiny. I am sure there is no one in this room who would not agree with
me that the report on industry assistance prepared at my Government's
invitation by Sir John Crawford and on which our legislation was
based is one of the most far-sighted and historic contributions
to the welfare of Australian industry ever prepared or published.
The other basic thought I have sought to convey to the business
community is our desire for full and frank communication with you.
We seek this communication, this understanding, with industry
and business just as much as we seek it with the trade union
movement. We want to hear from you and be involved in your problems.
/ 4 
Ole established at the outset of the Government a new
Department of Secondary Industry. Like you, we have always
emphasised the need for co-operation between industry and
government. My colleague, Dr. Cairns, has announced his
proposal for industry panels to bring together representatives
of industry, government, the trade unions and consumers to advise
on the development of industries. We have ncver run away from
consultation with industry, and I assure you that in future we
will never be anything but receptive to your views, sensitive to
to your needs, and sympathetic to your rightful ambitions.
It will help you, I think, if I state as clearly and
concisely as I can the wayt we should like to see industry develop
and the hopes we have for its future. They are confident hopes.
r? ha1y are based on a generous appraisal of your innate strength,
your good sense, your capacity to adapt and adjust to fresh
opportunities. We want to see industry, and the whole economy,
become more adaptable to changing technology and to changing
economic conditions both at homo and abraod. Whatever government may
be in power, there can never be, in today's unstable world, a
guarantee of absolute security for any industry, or indeed for any
sector of industry. You know how vulnerable primary industry has
proved to changes in the world climate; secondary industry on the
whole has been more fortunate. We want to ensure for all industry,
as far as possible, a greater resilienco and strength -a greater
competitive spirit and efficiency to enable it to withstand the
inevitable vicissitudes of a changing and more uncertain world.
2e want our manufacturing industries to become m~ ore oriented to
international markets not through sudden switches of policy, but
by gradual application and readjustment. In all these efforts,
industry will to assured of the guidance and support of the
Austral ian Government.
My final message tonight is addressed to you,
not as businessmen or manufacturers, but as Queenslanders. It
concerns the future of your State its relationship with the rest
of Australia and my own Government. I hope I am not breaking
confidence if I disclose, Mr. President, that when you wrote to me
recently about what I should say at this dinner, you said:
" Mayne it is time we were told once again that our industrial output
per head is the second lowest in Australia." Well, I would rather you
made the point than I, but quite frankly, it never occurred to me
to resort to such partisan and inflammatory remarns. Nevertheless,
I think there is a lesson here that is worth repeating. Whatever
the industrial output in Queensland, there is no reason why it
should not be among the highest in Australia, and I sincerely believe
the policies of my Government will help strengthen your industries
and raise your general prosperity.
For myself, I have never had anything but affection and
admiration for your State. After all, I am spcendi ng a few days'
holiday in one of your coastal cities this week. But I suppose,
like me, you have occasionally detected a slight sense of
estrangement between Mr. Bjelhe-Petersen's Government and mine.
There is, quite frankly, a coolness between us such as exists
between no other two governments in Australia. It can only be
damaging and desiructive to both of us. I seek an end to it. 
I am sure it is not for any want of generosity or willingness on our
part that the normal goodwill and mutual cooperation so essential
between State and National governments so essential to a
Federation somehow has faltered in the case of Queensland.
So that you may judge our good intentions, let me tell you of
some of . the things we have done for Queensland. When I first came
to Brisbane as Prime Minister that was in March this year I said:
" My Government's commitment to the welfare and progress of
Queensland is both general and specific. It is ' ased on two
great themes. There is first our general commitment to the
cities. It is in these areas that my Government's attack on
the problems of land and housing costs, school opp ortunities,
hospitals, public transport, unemployment, sport and culture
are principally directed. We have established a Department
of Urban and Regional Development to co-ordinate our work:
of rebuilding and regenerating our cities. Queensland will
share in that process. The related task of brinrjing new
standards of social welfare to the people has been entrusted
to our new Department of Social Security. I remind you that
this Department is headed by a Queenslander, my colleague
Bill Hayden. The second part of my Government's commitment to
Queensland is a specific one. It is in our policies for
northern Development. That Department is also headed by a
Queenslander, Dr. Rex Patterson. It is our aim, in co-operation
with the Government of Queensland, to develon the vast and valuable
resources of northern Australia for the benefit of the Australian
people. It is in the north that the great sugar and cattle
industries and much of our mineral industries hiave keen established.
It is in the north that Australians face their greatest challenge
in retaining the ownership of the nation's resources and
developing new industries under Australian control.
My Government has made one other specific pledge to the
Queensland people. We have undertaken that one of our two main
initiatives in regional development will be concentrated in
Townsville. I said last year in my policy speech that the national
Government was already responsible for decisions which have determined
the growth and the burdens of Townsville more than any other
Australian city except Canberra itself."
A few figures will suffice to show the extent of my Government's
assistance to Queensland. Remember that we spend much more on one
average Queenslander tnan we do on other Australians.
Our total payments to Queensland in 173/ 74, for all purposes,
are estimated at $ 585 million. This represents about $ 300 per head
compared with average payments to all States of about S270 per head.
Our housing advances of $ 17.4 million in 1973/ 74 will be 20% up on
last year. Our payments for education will rise dramatically as a
result of the recommendations of the Karmel committee and once
again Queensland will be getting a bigger percentage increase than
Australia as a whole. For primary and secondary schools we will be
paying $ 26.3 million in 1973/ 74 an increase of 148% over the
previous year ( for all States the increase is 144% from $ 74 million
to $ 181.9 million). For tertiary education we will pay Queensland
$ 47.9 million in 1973/ 74 an increase of 140% over the previous year. 
6
: We are taking several important initiatives in health,
and welfare a grant of $ 250,000 in 1973/ 74 for site acauisition
and planning of hospitals in Brishane, $ 2.3 million for co. mm.-unity
health facilities, an estimated $ 1 million for school dental
services. To help plan and develop new cities we are paying
$ 4.4 million to Queensland in 1973/ 74 and we have orovided
$ 3.1 million as a first contribution to Queensland to overcome
the unsewered premises.
Vie have moved quickly to improve your urban and country transport
systems. As we see it, the area most urgently requiring attention is
public transport. In Brisbane alone between 1960--61 and 1970.-71
the number of passenger journeys on public transport fell by
On a per capita basis the decline was even more diram-atic; it was
just about halved. So in F] c-, ruary A, thues tralian Government approved
a scheme to provide two-thirds. of the cos t of i~,' pvi-ngq urban publ. ic
transport. In our first Budget an allocation of $ 3?. 00 million
was made to commence this program. Tn Brisbane this year work will
begin on the Merivale Street Bridge, electrification of the railway
betw; Ueen Ferny Grove and Darra and construction of a third railway
track on the northern corridor to Jorthgate.
Our ex-enditure in this field will increase ranidly as these
projects get fully underway and other projects are added.
We have taken other action to improve your railways.
I wrote to your Premier on 8 Feruary confirming the Australian
Government's willingness to accept responsibility for your railway
system, if the Queensland Government wished to offer it.
Your Premier re quested more information on our initiative to help
his Government decide. ' ihis information has been provided and I
await Queensland's reply.
Four of the other States have agreed to hold discussions
to see if a mutually satisfactory basis for such a transfer
of responsibility can be devised. In both South Australia and
Western Australia these discussions are well advanced. For don't
forget, there are three main benefits to Queensland if you were to
accept our initiative. Your Government would be relieved of the
heavy burden of capital debt and interest payments in respect of the
railways. We would accept full responsibility for financing the
urban railway projects I have mentioned. At present Queensland is
required to provide one-third of the cost of these projects.
And we would accept the responsibility of ensuring that the railway
system in your State was efficient and provided the services
you need. That is an account, by no means exhaustive, of the kind of help
the Australian Government is providing. I have been in constant touch
with Mr. Bjelke-Petersen on matters of mutual concern to us.
Mind you, most of our dealings are conducted : y post; it is rare
that we have dinner together. But I confess in all sincerity that
I find it puzzling, disappointing, and not a little hurtful that the
Australian Government's earnest and proven concern for Queensland
is so often resented and mistrusted by your State Government. / 7 
7
nueensland is a great StCate; the mocst docentralized,
the most diverse, tihe mo-t colourful, rich,-in resnurcres.
ann d mny wys. the proudest arA mo: st indIividua listic of all.
It proviedes an unmistakab-le uleand vicjour to the wh-olo nat ion.
Yet I hiave to say that in many ways you are 1.) ehinC, the rest of us.
I have. referre' to your industrial output; there is also the fact
that youif eXjpen-ditLure on edtacationi, for emilis the lowest
per capita in Australia. Furthecrmore, you arc. m~ oving rapidlly
to ? iards nroblems of urban C econcration. It is estimated th-1-at the
opulation of greater flris,.-ane tiill double be) tweec-n now ane!
or 199" 0; th~ ere is no faster urb-an growthi in any ot our cities.
It is important that Queensland acts prome tly ' Lo avoiC, thne deep)-
seated prob-lorms of urban gro.-th al! rcacdy rrarifest in large -parts
of S'ydney and '-! el. 1ourne.
Preserve y., our identitv and y'our\ pride in yourre( lves,, 1ut
niot, I entreat you, at the cost'L of y. our progrress ind '. our
identification with thle nation's s YroaC interests aind, aspi rations.
Teeare many areas in the treatmcnt of Ahoriginals, in
off-shoro rosources, in the uetterrmination of '. ounc*, arJies, in
fmineral dovolopment where our j.~ ieas 11-ave conflic Led' and where,
TI concede, there arc legjitim,. ate-L-rgumentr, on b~ ~ os
IDut I s-aqge-st it would ; I tacif-1 if a stecrile o*)-c3, s4or w., ith
flaerijt~ were ao.' uto i mredethe roqrCus:;-of-cesad
i. 2 local iealousies ainclp,-aro7* L,-: i'. 3entiment 7s \ Yr. e allowed to standl
in your Way. Queenslant* cannot: a-fford -to boecomc Lin okl* l SLate out.
A ustralia cannot thrive Without " Australia.
I offer you tonight a lasting contract of co--o-Peration for a
greater and more prosperous ) ucenslan, 14 in a gr-atrr an,, more
nrosnerous . ThjA. tralia. Tn such a contract, srou, tlie reno7. ned and
suc~ s~ u m~ ifatursof thi rtate, w. 1 lya laostirc and
c~ sscn~ alprt.
B R I S BAT 1E .110ODAY 1 OCTOIMhP. 1973 



HEADS OF. GOVERNMENT. MEETING
CANBERRA, 11 OCTOBER 1973
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
Welcoming remarks.
The purpose of this meeting is to discuss, and I
hope agree on, proposals of the Australian Government which
are directed towards our objective of assisting and
strengthening local government and making it a fuller and
more effective partner in our Federal system.
There can be no doubt of the firmness of my
Government' s commitment to that objective. It is encompassed
in our Platform; it was explicit in my Policy Speech before
the last election;. most recently I re-affirmed it in my
speeches to the Constitutional Convention0 Indeed, our
meeting here today. had its direct impetus from the discussions
we had at the Convention0
Repeatedly, I have emphasised that one of the
essential requirements for full achievement of our objective
is a re-casting of the arrangements embodied in the present
Financial Agreement. These are arrangements which were based
on the situation of the 1920s, when the relative roles and
responsibilities of the Australian Government, the State
Governments and local government were vastly different from
what they now are0 They ar e not good enough0 They have not
been adequate for some time. They are certainly not adequate
for the future. We do not seek change for change's sake nor, as
some would say,, to centralise power in Canberra0 The planning
and provision-of public services and facilities to meet the
expanding needs of the whole community is becoming an 
increasingly complex task. It is one which cannot be
accomplished satisfactorily if we cling to old concepts, old
demarcation lines of interest and responsibility drawn up in
the distant past. Of course, when the Financial Agreement was
drawn up local government authority borrowing was relatively
insignificant. Things are very different now. The situation
now is that local government authorities have been borrowing
more each year than the total amount of their outstanding debt
only twenty years or so ago. It can be fairly said that if
the Financial Agreement were being drawn up now it would be
unthinkable that local government would be. entirely excluded
from it. Over at least the last two. decades there have
been serious deficiencies developing in the provision of many
of the public services and facilities which it has fallen to
the State-local government sector to provide. Partly this
has been a product of insufficiency of resources; but it has
also reflected processes of planning and of determination of
priorities which have been inadequate or too narrowly based.
My Government has set itself the task of helping
to remedy, in co-operation with the States and their
authorities, the deficiencies which now exist. We have made
a strong beginning witness the new or enlarged allocations
in our budget for 1973-74 for such purposes as education,
community . health, public . housing, sewerage services, land
management, urban--transport and . growth centres. . Total
allocations . to the.. States in 1973-74, including the State
Governments' Loan Council programs but excluding 
unemployment relief grants, are estimated to be no less than
24 per cent greater than the corresponding allocations in
1972-73. Local government is an area of special importance
which has suffered imbalances between responsibilities and
resources. The importance of local government derives from
the very fact that it is local that the services and
facilities which it provides have such a close and direct
impact on the welfare of the population it services. It is
our aim, in part, to make available to local government
resources more adequate for its functions. But our aim is
larger than that. If local government is to play the fuller
and more effective . part that I believe the community wishes
it to play, then we must also increase the effective influence
local government exercises in relation to the fundamental
decision-making affecting its activities, It will represent
a most significant step towards real Federalism, real local
participation in public affairs and, indeed, real
decentralisation of government when this is achieved.
We have already taken several very important
steps in that direction, We secured the representation of
local government at the Constitutional Convention, In its
Autumn Sittings the Australian Parliament passed a new Grants
Commission Act authorising that body to inquire into
applications for assistance by regional organisations of
local government, Any assistance recommended by the
Commission and approved by the Australian Government will be
paid to the States under section 96 of the Constitution on
condition that it be passed on to the local government 
organisations concerned. Additional members have been
appointed to the Commission and its staff is being expanded
to enable it to deal with this large new responsibility. It
is hoped that applications by regional organisations will
begin to be received and considered early next year.
Additionally, under the Australian Assistance Plan there will
be available to local government authorities special
assistance to enable them more effectively to provide welfare
and health services to their communities.
The proposals I am now putting to you and for
which I now seek your unanimous support represent a further
long step towards the same objective0 They are proposals of
which I have spoken many times before, including at the
recent Constitutional Convention, so I expect that you have
already thought about them a good deal yourselves. They
are:-that elected local government have both a voice
and a vote in the Loan Council0 It is of the
utmost importance, I believe, that the voice of
local government the voice of those people
with the closest knowledge of community needs
at the local and regional level be heard in
this decision-making forum; and
that the Australian Government be empowered to
borrow on behalf of elected local government.
There are, broadly, three bases on which the
first of these proposals might be sought.
One would be to admit representatives of local
government to the Loan-Council on the same basis as the 
present members, with full representation and voting rights
covering all matters dealt with by the Loan Council. While
I see considerable merit in this, I recognise that, in terms
of the present nature and range of Loan Council interests and
functions, it would raise some difficulties.
The other two bases would impose some limitations
on the role allotted to the local government representatives
in the Loan Council. We could, for example, limit local
government participation in both discussion and voting to
those matters directly affecting local government. Again,
I see difficulties in this approach, since the borrowing
programs of both the State governments and their local
and semi-government authorities are, I gather, generally
discussed in the same context at Loan Council meetings.
There would be a. constant problem as to the precise point
at which local government representatives would be admitted
to the discussions in the Loan Council. I have not the least
doubt that, experienced in and aware of the Loan Council
procedures as you are, it is unnecessary for me to enlarge
on this problem. For my own part, I see such arrangements as
providing much too limited a role for local government for
it to meet my Government's objectives.
The intermediate approach is therefore the one
I wish to propose to you. This would admit representatives
of elected local government to all Loan Council discussions,
with a right to vote on those matters directly affecting
local government essentially, the borrowing programs for
the bodies they represent and the allocations of these
programs. 
6.
Before I throw this proposal open for discussion
there are some points of principle and procedure that I
should canvass. First, there is the legal . framework within which
such a situation could be achieved. As I see it, the
Financial Agreement could be amended to accommodate and
provide a firm and proper basis for the new arrangements. I
am advised that the necessary amendments to the Financial
Agreement could be made, by agreement between the Australian
and State Governments, without taking it outside the scope
of section 105A of the Constitution as it stands. It would,
of course, be accepted that, in accordance with practice, any
such amendments should be validated by Acts of the Australian
and State Parliaments. Borrowings by local government bodies are at
present governed by the Gentlemen's Agreement, which also
covers borrowings by statutory authorities of the Australian
and State Governments. I should make it clear that my
proposal concerning representation in the Loan Council is
limited to elected local government bodies, I appreciate
that some of the largest borrowers,. individually, under the
Gentlemen's Agreement are statutory authorities mainly
public utilities of one kind or another, These bodies I see
as having adequate representation in the Loan Council through
the Premiers, They are essentially arms of the Governments
concerned. Indeed, there is in many cases only a fine
dividing line between the types of function they perform and
those of some State departments, and the respective functions
of the two vary from State to State, 
7.
It is clear that the proposed new arrangements
would require that provisions which are now part of the
Gentlemen's Agreement be re-cast, as would the nature of the
" programs" to be considered by the Loan Council. I envisage
that, in place of the existing division of the programs into
" larger" and " smaller" authorities, what would now be
required would be separate borrowing programs for local
government bodies and for the State Government
instrumentalities . I have no firm view on whether there
would still need to be a borrowing limit corresponding to
the existing amount of $ 400,000 below which there would be
no program ceiling imposed by the Loan Council. I am
inclined to think that there should be such a limit if we
are to avoid loss of the flexibility that now exists for
borrowings by smaller bodies. However, I see that as a
procedural matter to be resolved if agreement is reached on
the principle of local government representation.
The other proposal that I have said I want to
place before you is that arrangements be agreed upon for the
Australian Government to borrow on behalf of local government.
The Financial Agreement as it stands does not provide for
this. Let me provide some background. At June 1947
( satisfactory figures for earlier years are not available)
local government authorities total outstanding debt was about
$ 140 million about 7 per cent of total State Government
debt; at June 1971 the preliminary figure, provided by the
Statistician, was $ 1,730 million almost 15 per cent of
estimated total State Government debt at the time. In 
8.
twenty-four years local government authorities debt increased
more than twelvefold compared with an increase of not quite
sixfold in State Governments' total outstanding debt. Yet
after the period of extraordinary growth in the magnitude and
cost of local government activities, their place and role
in the forum determining the nation's broad public
borrowing programs was as it had. been at the beginning
in a word, nil. Does it not. strike you as odd that, while we
have established arrangements for borrowings by State
Governments to be undertaken on their behalf by the
Australian Government, local. government authorities are
largely left to fend for themselves in the capital markets?
Especially with the growing complexity and sophistication
of these markets, they are handicapped as borrowers.
I see this as being not only odd, but also as
quite unsatisfactory. Given the nature and range of public
servicesand facilities that local government authorities are
called upon to provide, why should they not also have the
opportunity to have the Australian. Government, with its
superior capacity as a borrower, undertake borrowings on
their behalf? I repeat here what I said earlier; that if
the Financial Agreement were being drawn up now it would be
unthinkable that these authorities could be ignored.
The costs of servicing their borrowings bear
heavily and increasingly so on the budgets on local
government authorities. While the picture differs from
State to State, and as between individual authorities, 
9.
overall interest payments by local government authorities
would now be equivalent to about 12 per cent of their
revenues. Interest payments plus capital repayments amounted
to some $ 177.5 million in 1970-71 and were equivalent to
about 25 per cent of revenues.
If the Australian Government were to be able to
borrow on behalf of local government authorities, the costs
of servicing the resultant debt would of course be
significantly lower than if those authorities borrowed the
funds directly themselves. And this would mean lesser costs
of services and lesser burdens on the local ratepayers.
It would be possible, of course, for the
Australian Government to borrow moneys and pass them on,
under section 96 of the Constitution, to State Governments
on condition that they be made available to local government
authorities. This procedure is not what I have in mind when
I speak of Australian Government borrowings on behalf of
local government. Premiers will appreciate the difference
between borrowings made by the Australian Government on behalf
of their States and borrowings made wholly on the Australian
Government's account which might be used to finance payments
to the States under section 96.
What I am seeking is your agreement to amend
the Financial Agreement to enable the Australian Government
to borrow for and on behalf of elected local government
bodies, just as it borrows for and on behalf of the State
Governments, and to provide the funds direct to those bodies.
The amendment would also make provision for consequential
arrangements for the servicing of such debt. 
I am not proposing that local government should
be required to havp borrowings for their purposes undertaken
on their behalf by the Australian Government regardless of
their wishes in the matter. It would be for each authority
to choose whether to take advantage of the new facility or
to rely on its own abilities as a borrower.
I am well aware that there would be a number of
legal and practical arrangements to be settled before the
proposal could be implemented. However, I am again advised
that the necessary amendments could be made to the Financial
Agreement to enable this to be done without taking it outside
section 105A of the Constitution as it stands.
In brief, those are the proposals I put to you
for your consideration and, I trust, agreement. It will be
clear from what I have said that I am seeking the cooperation
of the States in arrangements to provide local
government with a role and the resources adequate to its
responsibilities. With your assistance and co-operation
I believe, as I have already indicated, that this can be done
within the existing constitutional framework.
I urge your agreement to these proposals; that
way we can proceed quickly and with the least fuss and bother
to the urgent task of putting local government on a
satisfactory and viable basis0 I do not think there can be
any argument that such assistance is necessary indeed, it
is being demanded by the community. If, together, we cannot
agree on such arrangements, however, I do not see any adequate
alternative open to my Government but to seek to have the
Constitution amended for the purpose. However, as I say, I 
110
do not see that course as necessary if we can agree to adopt
the arrangements I have outlined. Indeed, I have not discussed
the alternative course in any depth here because I think each
of you will be as anxious as I to see your own local government
authorities playing their part in public affairs more
effectively. It must be made quite clear, however, that if I
am mistaken in that belief then my Government will adopt
the alternative course. I also . make it clear that I expect
that at this meeting here today we will decide between the
alternatives of co-operative action or constitutional
amendment. I am not, of course, seeking a solution to all
the practical and procedural problems today. Neither am I
suggesting that those problems should be cleared away before
the decisions in principle are reached. If we can reach
unanimous agreement on the broad proposals I have outlined,
we can then quickly proceed to establish machinery to put
them into effect. But I am seeking such agreement today for
the reason that, in its absence, I would wish to have before
the end of the current sittings of the Australian Parliament
the necessary legislation for a referendum on the amendment
of section 105A. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT
A PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON FOR HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN, PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, 18.10.73
The head of Government, and the head of the Opposition
to the Government, will now be able to join in a welcome to our
Head of State I welcome Her majesty as Queen of Australia.
From tomorrow that title will, in this country, take precedence
over all our other titles.
I, of course, am still rather new to hobnobbing with
Royalty. You will forgive me, therefore, if I drop a name
occasionally. ( laughter) It was at Windsor ( laughter) on Good
Friday, that Her Majesty was gracious enough to say how gladly
she welcomed the suggestion for the change in her title her
Royal Style and Title. The new title expressly, directly, clearly
the role of the monarchy in Australia. ( applause)
It is the Queen herself who, under the Constitution,
under the two Houses, makes up the Australian Parliament. It
is in the Queen that the executive power of this nation is vested.
It is to the Queen that the salaries of the ministers are to be
paid. It is in the Queen's name that the Governor-General assents
to a bill passed by the Houses.
Tomorrow, in fact, the Queen will assent to a Bill passed
by both Houses. There is no difficulty in getting this Bill through
both Houses it is the Royal Style and Titles Bill. But the Queen,
tomorrow, will discharge further of her functions as Head of State.
For the first time, I believe, the Queen herself will swear and
administer the oath of office to a minister. The Queen for the
first time, in Australia, will sign letters of credence. They
will be for her Australian aibasssadors to Japan, the Soviet Union
and the United States, and a letter of commisnion for her High
Commissioner to India. She will complete the formalities for the
ratification of treaties with our nearest and greatest neighbour,
Indonesia, and with another of her realms, Canada. She will apply
laws to the Coral Sea Islands territories. I don't want to raise
questions of off-shore waters or seabeds there are too many
distinguished visitors from some of the Australian provinces for
me to do that. And tomorrow, in assenting to the Royal Style and Titles
Act Her Majesty will appoint the new Great Seal.
Now, on this occasion, Her Majesty comes to Australia
to perform and celebrate a very great occasion for Australia, at
home and abroad the opening of the Sydney Opera House. It is
an event which has been long awaited and long deferred. 
-2-
I think on each of your recent visits Your Majesty will
have been told that the Sydney Opera House would be opened soon.
You live in the midst of the monuments of history so Your Majesty
will realise that these things do take a little time. This has
taken 14 years; the Parthenon took 15 years; the Royal Church
at Westminster took five centuries. This building will stand in
our region with buildings as great as Borobodur, Ankor Wat. And
they will say the Sydney Opera House. It will be used as long
and probably by even more people than Westminster Abbey or the
cathedrals of equal age or the Pantheon itself. This building is
in Sydney. The earth has not anything to show more fair than
Sydney harbour. ( faint laughter) I would have expected a greater
manifestation of national spirit in the National Capital. I will
say it again: the earth has not anything to show more fair than
Sydney harbour. I'm really only warming the audience up for Mr.
Snedden and Her Majesty. ( laughter and applause)
Now there are indeed sermons in these stones as well as
songs. The course of the planning and erection of the Sydney
Opera House was not always plain sailing. While it took time in
the courage and initiative and the enterprise and inventiveness
to bring about this great building, we must also acknowledge some
of the timidities and frustrations and jealousies and compromises
which played their part in its story. But it is a magnificent
building. Our civilisations are known by their buildings and future
generations will honour the people of this generation the people
of this kingdom by this building. ( applause)
Any occasion that brings you here Ma'am is very much a
family occasion. Last time you brought Prince Charles and Princess
Anne. I am sure it would be the wish of this gathering that you
should hear at first hand the pleasure it brings to all your people
in this country that Princess Anne is about to be married. We look
forward to welcoming her and her husband when you come here next
year. And next year, of course, Your Majesty will also be visiting
Papua New Guinea a self-governing part of Your Majesty's realms.
And you will be illustrating at first hand the opportunity which is
afforded to the people of Papua New Guinea through the free exercise
of choice of their people to serve an independent nation and to be
a member of the Commonwealth of which you are head.
I must express, also, on behalf of this gathering our
pleasure that you have brought your husband with you. Indeed I
think I can say it is with some relief that he has come again.
I'm speaking not only of the fact that when he was last here in
March there were no ladies other than Senatrices at the gathering.
That was an uproarous occasion and the Speaker and the President
well remember the afternoon which followed. This is a very much more
decorous more demure occasion; the Parliament will be better for
it. I am not only expressing relief on behalf of the Presiding
Officers for the good name of the Parliament, I am also expressing
relief mna very more self-interested way. I am the first Prime
Minister since Sir. Robert Menzies who during his term of office has
been able to survive a second visit from Prince Philip. And indeed
I read in the papers that a couple of weeks ago some of my colleagues
were about to urge me to cable him " come quickly". At last the jinx
has been broken. Prince Philip has abandoned his role as the Nemesis 
-3-
of Australian Prime Ministers. We have long ago got over our
misgivings. When you Ma'am as heiress presumptive took as your
consort another Philip we had misgivings because the last Philip
who was a consort to the Queen of England did play rather too
strong a political role as we still read. Now, of course,
Prince Philip has eschewed all forms of political activity.
He has devoted himself to many good causes in this nation. One
perhaps might pick out, in particular, the issue of conservation.
It is the field which is so free of petty jealousies and frictions
and pressure groups. There is an automatic consensus on the public
good on any conservation issue. And while all around are losing
their positions, at least Prince Philip is able to'survive.
In welcoming you once again to Australia and to the
Australian Parliament on behalf of the Australian people, let
me adapt : the words of the first Elizabeth when she addressed her
Parliament:" You will find in all your realms a better and a
stronger people but never will you find better friends than in
your Parliament of Australia". 



6' d 3, 7 3,
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR E. G. WHITLAM, AT THE
SIGNING OF THE ALBURY-WODONGA
AREA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
JUST NINE MONTHS AGO, SIR ROBERT ASKIN, MR HAMER
AND I MET HERE IN ALBURY-WODONGA AND AGREED ON A HISTORIC
PLAN FOR A NEW AUSTRALIAN CITY IN THIS AREA. IT GIVES ME
GREAT PLEASURE TODAY TO MEET THE PREMIERS AGAIN TO SIGN
THE ALBURY-WODONGA AREA DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
! ITH THE CONCURRENCE OF THE STATES THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INITIATED THE MEETING IN JANUARY, BUT FROM THAT
DAY IT BECAME A JOINT VENTURE. LET'S NOT IMAGINE THAT THIS
IS AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROJECT EXCLUSIVELY FAR FROM
IT, ITS SUCCESS DEPENDS ON CONTINUED'CO-OPERATION BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. THE THREE
GOVERNMENTS ARE EQUAL PARTNERS.
THE JANUARY MEETING WAS THE FIRST STEP. IT THEN
BECAME THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE MINISTERIAL COUNCI.
MR UREN, MR FULLER AND MR BYRNE TO ESTABLISH AN AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE THREE GOVERNMENTS WHICH WOULD EMBODY OUR JOINT
COMMITMENT AND PROVIDE A SOUND BASE ON WHICH THIS AREA CAN
GROW IN HARMONY WITH THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. 
-2-
THEY HAVE DONE WELL, THE DOCUMENT WE HAVE BEFORE
US TODAY IS EVIDENCE OF THAT, IT IS A CREDIT TO THEM AND
TO THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED, IT REFLECTS A CONTINUING
SPIRIT-OF CO-OPERATION AND PROVIDES A FIRST-CLASS EXAMPLE
OF HOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES CAN WORK
TOGETHER TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR THOUSANDS OF
AUSTRALIANS OVER THE NEXT FEW DECADES,
THE PREPARATION OF THIS AGREEMENT HAS BEEN A
FORMIDABLE LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TASK, IT HAS TAKEN ONLY
NINE MONTHS, I KNOW THAT MANY MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMUNITY
WOULD LIKE MORE ACTION, BUT THE IMPORTANCE, THE SIZE AND
THE. QUALITY OF THIS PROJECT CALL FOR A GREAT DEAL OF
FORBEARANCE AND PATIENCE ON THE PART OF US ALL,
A PRIMARY PURPOSE OF THE AGREEMENT IS TO ESTABLISH
A STRONG AND EFFECTIVE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION TO BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GROWTH COMPLEX,
EXPERIENCE OVERSEAS AND IN THIS COUNTRY HAS SHOWN CLEARLY
THAT THIS IS AN ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT IN THE SUCCES) F F
NEW CITY DEVELOPMENT ,/ 3 
-3-
DETAILS OF THE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION WERE
ANNOUNCED AND WELL PUBLICISED BY THE MINISTERIAL COUNCIL
ON 4 JULY, To REFRESH YOUR MEMORY CHARTS HAVE BEEN
CIRCULATED AND I HOPE THEY WILL BE WIDELY BROUGHT TO THE
NOTICE OF THE PUBLIC,
AT FIRST GLANCE THE FORM OF THE ORGANISATION MAY
APPEAR COMPLEX, BUT FUNDAMENTALLY IT IS NOT, IT IS A FULLY
INTEGRATED ORGANISATION WITH COMMON MEMBERSHIP AND COMMON
STAFF, THE THREE LEGAL CORPORATIONS ARE REQUIRED TO MEET
THE CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE THREE GOVERNMENTS,
IN PRACTICE, HOWEVER, THE ORGANISATION WILL WORK AS A SINGLE
ENTITY RESPONSIBLE TO THE MINISTERIAL COUNCIL,
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEES OF THE
ORGANISATION WILL IDENTIFY WITH ONE BODY AND ONE GOAL
NAMELY THE CREATION OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE WITH A HIGH-QUALITY
ENVIRONMENT, IMAGINATIVELY PLANNED AND DEVELOPED,
I WAS PARTICULARLY PLEASED TO'SEE THAT PROVISION
HAS BEEN MADE FOR A CONSULTATIVE COUNCIL TO PROVIDE A VEHICLE
FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN THE PROJECT, OVER THE PAST
NINE MONTHS THE INTERIM CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE, MADE UP OF
REPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY INTERESTS,
HAS PLAYED A VITAL AND CONTRIBUTING RO'LE IN THE DEVELOPMENT
SO FAR, ,/ 4 
THE AGREEMENT OF COURSE REQUIRES COMPLIMENTARY
LEGISLATION AND I UNDERSTAND THAT THE STATES ARE CURRENTLY
DRAFTING BILLS, YOU HAVE MY ASSURANCE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED WITHOUT DELAY
AFTER THE SIGNING OF THIS AGREEMENT,
YOU WILL ALSO BE AWARE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS ADVERTISED FOR A CHAIRMAN OF THE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION,
WE SHALL MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO ENSURE THAT WE GET THE RIGHT
MAN FOR THIS ALL IMPORTANT POSITION,
YOU WILL ALSO BE AWARE THAT $ 9 MILLION HAS BEEN
BUDGETED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR EXPENDITURE IN
1973-74 ON THE FIRST PHASE OF THE ACQUISITION PROGRAM UNDER
THE PROVISIONS OF APPROPRIATE STATE LAND PRICE STABILISATION
LEGISLATION AND SELECTED PUBLIC WORKS, THIS IS ONLY THE
BEGINNING IT WILL BE A CONTINUING COMMITMENT,
AN IMMENSE AMOUNT OF WORK HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE ON
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A PLANNING STRATEGY, A FIRM COM1ITMENT
HAS BEEN GIVEN, AND INCLUDED IN THE AGREEMENT, THAT AREAS TO
BE ACQUIRED FOR URBAN AND ASSOCIATED DEVELOPMENT WILL BE
ANNOUNCED NO LATER THAN 30 JUNE NEXT YEAR, THE MINISTERIAL
COUNCIL WISELY DECIDED NOT TO WAIT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION BEFORE PLANNING COMMENCED, 
WE WOULD ALL LIKE TO SEE THINGS HAPPEN IMMEDIATELY,
BUT IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT WE HAVE THE RESULTS OF THE VERY
NECESSARY MAJOR STUDIES. THAT ARE UNDERWAY BEFORE THE OVERALL
STRATEGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT IS ANNOUNCED.
I WOULD LIKE TO RECORD THE SATISFACTION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND MY OWN PERSONAL SAT ISFACTION AT
THE SUCCESSFUL CONCLUSION OF THIS FIRST PHASE IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF ALBURY-WODONGA, IT AUGURS WELL FOR THE
FUTURE AND, AS I HAVE SAID, PROVIDES AN HISTORIC EXAMPLE
OF HOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES CAN WORK
TOGETHER IN THE INTERESTS OF THE TOTAL AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY.
-o-o-o-0-o-0-o-



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
A DINNER OF THE AUSTRALIAN-FARMERS' FEDERATION
HOTEL CANBERRA, TUESDAY 23 OCTOBER 1973
I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY TO ADDRESS ONE OF THE
LARGEST, MOST REPRESENTATIVE AND MOST RESPECTED PRIMARY
PRODUCERS'I ORGANISATIONS IN THIS COUNTRY.
ONE OF THE SIGNAL FEATURES OF YOUR FEDERATION
AND I FIND IT SPECIFIED IN YOUR CONSTITUTION IS YOUR
POLICY OF POLITICAL NEUTRALITY. YOU ARE AFFILIATED WITH
NO POLITICAL PARTY OR SECTIONAL INTEREST. I GIVE YOU CREDIT
FOR RECOGNISING THAT THE TRUE INTFRESTS OF THE PRTMARY
PRODUCER ARE NOT NECESSARILY SERVED BY THE POLITTCAL FORCES
MOST VOCAL, MOST STRIDENT, IN YOUR SUPPORT. Yotj KNOW IT
IS OFTEN SAID THAT WE IN THE LABOR PARTY ARE HOSTILE TO
THE RURAL COMMUNITY: THAT LABOR IS A CITY-8AS~ F) PARTY
DANCING TO THE TUNE OF POWER-HUNGRY UNIONS.
THE FACT IS THAT LABOR IS NEITHER AN' URBAN NOR A RURAL
PARTY, BUT A NATIONAL PARTY. WE ARE A NATITONAL GOVERNMENT,
GUIDED BY NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS, AND DETERMINED TO
PRODUCE A MORE OPEN, MORE EQUAL, MORE TOLERANT AND MORE
PROSPEROUS SOCIETv THAN WE INHERITED FROM OUR PR[ DFCESS: ORS.
I WANT TO CONVINCE YOU THAT JUST AS THE GOVERNMENT'S INTERESTS
ARE NATIONAL INTERESTS, SO YOUR INTERESTS, THE FARMERS'I INTERESTS,
DEPEND IN THE ULTIMATE ON A BROAD PERCEPTION OF THE NATIONAL GOOD,
.1./ 2 
-2AHAS
ANY COUNTRY, ANY STATE, EVER PROSPERED THROUGH A
CONCENTRATION ON ONLY ONE SECTOR OF ITS PEOPLE OR INDUSTRY?
WE USED TO BE OVERWHELMINGLY A PASTORAL ECONOMY; WE ARE A
GREATER NATION TODAY BECAUSE OUR ECONOMY IS MIXED AND DIVERSIFIED.
AND YOU, THE FARMERS, LIKE ALL AUS! TRALIANS, HAVE BENEFITED FROM
THIS GREATER STRENGTH AND DIVERSITYi YOU CAN SEE THIS BY LOOKING
AT THE RURAL ECONOMY ITSELF. YOU ARE LESS DEPENDENT ON THE
RANDOM FORTUNES OF ONE COMMODITY WOOL. MANY A PASTORALIST
HAS BEEN SAVED BY THE BUOYANCY OF THE CATTLE MARKET OR ONE OF
OUR GRAIN MARKETS. TO ADAPT A FAMILIAR PHASE, WHAT IS GOOD
FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS GOOD FOR THE COUNTRY.
I CONFESS THAT NOTHING EXASPERATES ME MORE THAN THIS
BASELESS ACCUSATION THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT RECONGISES THE GREAT CONTRIBUTION MADE BY THE
RURAL SECTOR TO THE NATIONAL ECONOMY AS A PROVIDER OF FOOD
FOR OUR GROWING POPULATION, AS A PROVIDER OF LARGE EXPORT
SURPLUSES EARNING VALUABLE FOREIGN EXHANGE. RURAL EXPORTS
LAST YEAR ACCOUNTED FOR MORE THAN 50% OF THE VALUE OF OUR EXPORT
EARNINGS, DESPITE THE RISING CONTRIBUTION OF MANUFACTURED GOODS
AND MINERALS TO * THE TRADE BALANCE. ALTHOUGH THE RURA[
POPULATION HAS DECLINED SUBSTANTIALLY IN THE POST-WAR PERIOD$
WITH A LARGE DROP IN THE FARM WORKFORCE, THE PRODUCTIVITY OF
AUSTRALIAN FARMERS HAS EASILY OFFSET THIS TREND. THROUGH
GREATER INVESTMENT IN MACHINERY AND FERTILISERS1 PRODUCTION HAS
CONTINUED TO EXPAND EXCEPT IN YEARS OF DROUGHT, So AUSTRALIAN
FARMERS ARE EFFICIENT FARMERS, AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION~ ABROAD,
AS A TRADER IN PRIMARY PRODUCTS, IS HIGH. DOES ANYONE SERIOUSLY
BELIEVE THAT WE IN THE LABOR PARTY CAN BE INDIFFERENT OR HOSTILE
TO AN INDUSTRY AS VAST, AS EFFICIENT, AS PRODUCTIVE, AS ESSENTIAL
AS YOURS? 
IF WE LOOK BACK ON THE HISTORY OF PRIMAR'. INDUST-T
IN THIS COUNTRY, WE SEE ONE OUTSTANDING FEATURE. I PUT IT
TO YOU THAT TI. CHIEF CHARACTERISTI OF YOUR INDLSTRY,
WHATEVER GOVERNMENT IS IN POWER, IS. ITS VULNERABILITY, IORE
THAN ANY OTHER SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY YOU ARE SUBJECT TO
UNPREDICTABLE AND IMPONDERABLE CIRCUMSTANCES. YOU ARE AT
THE MERCY OF THE SEASONS, AT THE MERCY OF WORLD CURRENCY
REALIGNMENTS, OF FLUCTUATING INTFRI'ATIONAL MARKETS, GLUTS
AND SHORTAGES. CAN YOU HONESTLY SAY THAT THE POLICIES
PURSUED DURING 23 YEARS OF GOVERNMENT BY OUR OPPONENTS
BY YOUR SELF-PROCLAIMED POLITICAL ALLIES HAVE REMOVED
YOUR FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OR GUARANTEED YOU ANY PERMANENT
SECURITY AND PROSPERITY?
JUST THREE YEARS AGO, YOU WILL REMEMBER, FARM INCOMES
IN THIS COUNTRY WERE THE LOWEST IN TERMS OF PURCHASING POWER
SINCE 1944, WHEN DROUGHT AND WAR-TIME CONDITIONS PRODUCED
A QUITE DRASTIC RURAL RECESSION. No GOVERNMEN1, OF COURSE,
AN GUARANTEE YOU IMMUNITY TO ACTS OF2 GoD OR TO INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENTS BEYOND OUR CONTROl.., I MERELY SIIGGEST " HAT
PAST GOVERNMENT POLICIES TOWARDS RURAL INDUSTRY HAVE 4OT
SOLVED YOUR UNDERLYING PROBLEMS, AND IN KANY CASES HAVE SERVED
TO PERPETUATE THEM. 1 1/ 4 
-4-
I GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE, IN THE LAST 30 YEARS,
GOVERNMENTS HAVE POURED SOME $ 77 " MILLION INTO THE DAIRY
INDUSTRY BY WAY OF BOUNTIES, -THESE BOUNTIES HAVE DONE
NOTHING TO SOLVE THE INDUSTRY'S MAdOR PROBLEM THE ADJUSTMENT
OF FARM PRODUCTION LEVELS TO REALISTIC LOCAL AND OVERSEAS
DEMAND, BY FAVOURING THE WEALTHIER PRODUCER AND THE RICHER
DAIRYING STATES, THEY HAVE DONE LITTLE TO IMPROVE THE LOT
OF SMALL DAIRY FARMERS, MANY OF WHOM ARE REPRESENTED IN
YOUR FEDERATION, THIRTEEN YEARS AGO, AN INDEPENDENT
COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY OUR PREDECESSORS UNANIMOUSLY
RECOMMENDED THE ABOLITION OF THE DAIRY SUBSIDY, THAT
RECOMMENDATION WAS IGNORED, WHAT BETTER TIME TO PHASE OUT
THIS SUBSIDY THAN NOW, WHEN RETURNS IN THE MAJOR ALTERNATIVE
ENTERPRISE THAT OF BEEF PRODUCTION ARE AT RECORD LEVELS,
AND WHEN THE LONG-TERM PROSPECTS IN THAT INDUSTRY ARE
REGARDED AS HIGHLY PROMISING? DON'T FORGET THAT IN
CONSULTATION WITH. THE INDUSTRY AND STATE AUTHORITIES, WE ARE
EXAMINING THE BEST MEANS OF PROVIDING RE-ADJUSTMENT
ASSISTANCE WHILE THE BOUNTIES ARE PHASED OUT,
I GIVE YOU ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF UNFAIR AND
SELF-DEFEATING CONCESSIONS TO THE RURAL SECTOR, IN THE
BUDGET THIS YEAR WE LOOKED CRITICALLY AT A NUMBER OF TAX
CONCESSIONS RECEIVED BY FARMERS, WE FOUND THAT THESE
CONCESSIONS MADE LITTLE REAL SENSE FROM YOUR LONG-TERM
POINT OF VIE1W, OR FROM THE COMMUNITY'S POINi: OF VIEW, 
I REMIND YOU THAT A CONCESSION TO ONE GROUP OF 1AXPAYERS CAN
BE MADE ONLY AT THE EXPENSE OF TAXPAYERS GENERALLY; IT IS
GOOD GOVERNMENT PRACTICE TO LOOK AT THESE THINGS CRITICALLY
t
FROM TIME TO TIME, WE FOUND THAT SOME TAX CONCESSIONS
FARMERS WERE RECEIVING WERE DESIGNED TO ENCOURAGE FARM
INVESTMENT, THEY WERE INTRODUCED, IN THE MAIN, IN THE
DECADE AFTER WORLD WAR II WHEN AUSTRALIA WAS CRITICALLY SHORT
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES AND WHEN THERE WAS AN URGENT
NATIONAL NEED TO EXPAND EXPORTS, CONDITIONS HAVE, OF COURSE,
CHANGED DRAMATICALLY SINCE THEN, OUR EXPORT INCOMES ARE
HIGH AND RISING; OUR INTERNATIONAL RESERVES ARE NEAR RECORD
LEVELS LEVELS UNDREAMT OF 3 OR 4 YEARS AGO. IN THESE
VASTLY ALTERED CIRCUMSTANCES, ARTIFICIAL BOOSTS TO FARM
INVESTMENT AND EXPORT PRODUCTION MAKE, QUITE SIMPLY, LITTLE
OR NO ECONOMIC SENSE, THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE CAN IGNORE
THE VITAL IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMICALLY HEALTHY AND EFFICIENT
INDUSTRIES, IT SIMPLY MEANS THAT IT NO LONGER PAYS US AS
A NATION TO DEVELOP FARMS MORE RAPIDLY THAN IT WOULD PAY YOU
YOURSELVES TO DEVELOP THEM,
IN THIS CONTEXT, IT IS IMPORTANT TO CONSIDER THE
CURRENT HEALTH OF THE RURAL SECTOR, WORLD DEMAND HAS
INCREASED SHARPLY FOR MOST OF AUSTRALIA'S EXPORT COMMODITIES,
ESPECIALLY WOOL AND MEAT, THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS HAS ESTIMATED NET FARM INCOME IN 1972-73 AT A
RECORD LEVEL OF $ 1,880 MILLION, A RISE OF $ 744 MILLION OVER
THE YEAR BEFORE, PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES FOR 1973-74 SHOW A
NET FARM INCOME OF $ 2,865 MILLION, UP 52% OF 1972-73, ,/ 6 
-6-
THE BUREAU'S PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE OF THE GROSS VALUE OF
RURAL PRODUCTION IN 1973-74 IS A" MASSIVE FIGURE OF $ 6,110
MILLION MORE THAN $ 1,000 MILLION GREATER THAN THE PAST
YEAR, AT THE SAME TIME THE RATE O'INCREASE IN RURAL DEBTS
IS SLACKENING OFF, AND FARMERS ARE REPAYING THEIR EXISTING
DEBTS MORE QUICKLY. HIGHER FARM INCOMES HAVE ENABLED MANY
FARMERS TO REPAY THEIR DEBTS; AND THIS, COMBINED WITH
BUOYANT AND RISING PRICES, HAS MADE THE FARMING COMMUNITY
MORE PROSPEROUS TODAY THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE WORLD WAR II,
Now I DON'T WANT TO MAKE TOO MUCH OF THIS. IN MANY
WAYS IT IS FORTUITOUS, JUST AS YOUR RECENT RECESSION WAS
FORTUITOUS; AND AS I HAVE ARGUED ALREADY, THE INHERENT
CHARACTERISTIC OF YOUR INDUSTRY IS ITS PATTERN OF INSTABILITY,
I SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT YOUR CURRENT OVERALL PROSPERITY
PRESENTS A GOOD OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE FARMING MORE OF A
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE, MORE VIABLE, MORE EFFICIENT, MORE
SECURE, MORE FLEXIBLE AND RESPONSIVE TO MARKET TRENDS, WE
ARE OPPOSED TO OPEN-ENDED COMMITMENTS WHICH PLACE NO LIMIT
ON TREASURY ALLOCATIONS AND SUBSIDIES AND WHICH CAST ThE
FARMERS, IN THE EYES OF THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE, AS A
MENDICANT CLASS, HEEDLESS OF SOUND BUSINESS PRACTICE AND
DEPENDENT ON THE TAXPAYERS' CHARITY$ I GIVE YOU MY ASSURANCE
THAT THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTINUE TO ASSIST PRIMARY INDUSTRY,
BECAUSE YOUR CONTINUED PROSPERITY IS ESSENTIAL TO US ALL, . BUT
OUR ASSISTANCE WILL BE GEARED TO NATIONAL INTERESTS AND NEEDS,
,/ 7 
7-
THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR DIRECTING GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRY WILL BE-OUR INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION. As YOU KNOW, THIS IS BEING SET UP ON THE
BASIS OF A REPORT FROM SIR JOHN CRAWFORD IN ORDER TO
SUBJECT CALLS FOR ASSISTANCE TO ALL INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING
RURAL INDUSTRY, TO REGULAR INDEPENDENT AND PUBLIC SCRUTINY.
IN THIS CONNECTION, I COMMEND THE FULL AND GENEROUS SUPPORT
I HAVE RECEIVED FROM YOUR ORGANISATION ON THIS ISSUE. YOU
RECOGNISED QUITE FRANKLY THAT SUCH A COMMISSION MIGHT,
ON OCCASIONS, WORK AGAINST THE SHORT-TERM INTEREST OF ONE
OF YOUR INDUSTRILS, BUT THAT REGULAR, INDEPENDENT PUBLIC
SCRUTINY OF ALL ASSISTANCE PROPOSALS WILL, IN THE LONG RUN,
BENEFIT MOST ECONOMIC PRODUCERS AND ALL OF US AS CONSUMERS
AND AS TAXPAYERS. THAT IS A. REALISTIC AND SENSIBLE APPRAOCH, BUT IT
IS NOT, I GATHER, THE APPROACH TAKE' BY THE COUNTRY PARTY,
THEY SEEM TO THINK THEY KNOW BETTER THAN YOU, THE FARMERSi
WHAT IS GOOD FOR THE FARMING COMMUNIV. THIS MAY NOT BE THE
PLACE TO SPECULATE ON THE COUNTRY PARTY'S MOTIVES,, BUT I MUST
DISCOUNT THE SUGGESTION THAT THEIR APPROACH TO THIS MEASURE
HAS ANYTHING TO DO WITH THEIR PLANS TO COINTEST CITY ELECTORATES.
I CANNOT BELIEVE FOR A MOMENT THAT THEY ARE MORE INTERESTED IN
WINNING SUPPORT AMONG CITY MANUFACTURERS ' TIAN IN FLIFTHERING THE
INTERESTS OF COUNTRY PEOPLE. I LEAVE TIIOS ; F UESTIONS TO YOU)
YOU KNOW THE COUNTRY PARTY BETTER THAN I DO. J NOTICE) HIOWEVER,
MR. ANTHONY'S STATEMENT THAT THE COMMISSIOiJ WILL USLhZP THE
GOVERNMENT'S AUTHORITY. I ,/ 8 
-8-
HE SUGGESTS THAT THE COMMISSION WILL BE SO POWERFUL THAT NO
GOVERNMENT WILL BE ABLE TO REJECT ITS ADVICE, COMING FROM
A MEMBER OF GOVERNMENT THAT REJECTED ADVICE, AND CONCEALED
ADVICE, ON INNUMERABLE OCCASIONS'-I FIND THAT HARD TO ACCEPT,
IT IS, OF COURSE, A FANTASY, IT IS INTENDED TO CREATE
DOUBT AND UNCERTAINTY ABOUT PROPOSAS-THAT ARE IN FACT
QUITE CLEAR AND HAVE BEEN SPELT OUT-IN OUR LEGISLATION IN
PRECISE DETAIL, THE HEART OF THE LEGISLATION IS THE SO-CALLED
MANDATORY REFERENCE PROVISION. THIS REQUIRES THE GOVERNMENT
TO REFER TO THE COMMISSION FOR INQUIRY AND REPORT ALL QUESTIONS
OF ASSISTANCE TO A PARTICULAR PRIMARY OR SECONDARY INDUSTRY
BEFORE TAKING ACTION TO PROVIDE SUCH ASSISTANCE. THE MANDATORY
REFERENCE PROVISION PROVIDES A VITAL SAFEGUARD TO THE
INTEGRITY OF THE GENERAL SYSTEM, WHEREBY THE GOVERNMENT
DECIDES ON THE DIFFERENT AMOUNTS OF MONEY TO BE GIVEN TO
PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES, IT ENSURES THAT THE SYSTEM FOR
DISCRIMINATING BETWEEN DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES WILL BE OBJECTIVE
AND IMPARTIAL. IN THE ABSENCE OF THIS PROVISION THERE WOULD
BE VERY GREAT PRESSURE ON PARLIAMENTARIANS, AND IN PARTICULAR
ON MINISTERS, TO HAVE LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE DECIDED BEHIND
CLOSED DOORS WITHOUT PUBLIC INQUIRY, CONTRARY TO THE
PRINCIPLES OF OPEN GOVERNMENT AND THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS, ,/ 9 
Twl ViwwFroy PW~ VI S ION DOES NOT RESTR IWr TWf
GovE~ wr'IsSF REEDOM~ TO M~ AKE ACROS-S-ThE-BOARD AWUSIEVTS
OF TARIFFS AWO OThER ASSISTANCE, iTV EXTEND FREFEPRMArIAL
" MEArTMEtIT TO DEVELOP I t4fr COU NT RI FS OR -TO NEGOI VATE7 CHA G ES
IN4 LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE FOA THE PUJRPOSE OF INTEERNATIONAL
TRADE AGREEMENTS.-IT DOES NOT R ESTR ICT THE GO) VERN~ T'S
ABILITY TO PROVIDE URGE14T TEMPORARY FINANCIAL ASS ISTAN4CE
TO INDUSTRIES FOR PERIODS NOT EXCEEDIIG ' TWELVE, M OWi* HS.
TolE 6OVENME4T wiLL-BrE AELE-TO REiPER To ThdE Commiss tON
THE QAESTION Of 4SSISTAWE TO Atty AuSTRALIAtI INDUSTRYj
AN I MjAKING, ITS INQUIRY THE C0144ISSION WILL BE FREE
TO C014SIDER AND REPORT ON ALL FORM4S OF ASSISTANCE WICk
T4E INDUSTRY INd QUESTION IS RECEIVING. IN CASES WERE
ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN UNCHANGED OR UNREVIEWED FOR AT LEAST
SIX YEARS, THE COMMISSION WILL BE ABLE TO INITIATE lWUIRE%
THIS WILL BE A SAFEGUARD A6AINST THE~ fIDEFINITE CDWA&amp;'&amp; jVU~ tW0A/-
OF ASSISTANCE TO PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES AFrEA 17 IS twEDEP
IREMIND) YOU THAT TWl GOVERIW1EPJT iv) LL STILL HAVE
AVAIJLABLE TO IT SOURCES OF ADVI CE 6TIER rorHE-Comm&amp; is otv
THIS ADVICE WILL COME FRom INDUSTRIES ') F-IENSELXESj q~ f r-Ror
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS SUCH AS ' YOURSi IF Tih6ApVICE 0, F rHb
COMMISS ION IS S0 GOOD THAT IT CANINOT 867 RWECTIP' IHAT119
WILL SURELY BE IN TWf JNTERETSTS OF Tif W/ f1l"#/ AS A WN0C3L
J F THE ADVICE IS NO# 07,, Ir SHOULD NOT WE VERY HAA4) l-o
RIEJECT. I MIEELY 14OI4DER k~ HETER OUR~ OPPONENTS AR~ E IN~ TEREST Ej,
IN GM1ING? GOOD ADVICE AT ALL. 
OUR LEGISLATION FOR THE INDUSTR, ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
WILL NOT AFFECT OUR PLANS FOR RURAL RECONSTRUCTION. W4E WILL,
HOWEVER, BE GUIDED BY ADVICE FROM THE COMMISSION. AFTER A
REVIEW OF THE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME THIS YEAR, THE
GOVERNMENT DECIDED TO CONTINUE THE* SCH . EME UNTIL 1976, BUT WITH
MORE EMPHASIS BEING PLACED ON THE BUILD-UP OF UNECONOMIC FARM
UNITS. MORE THAN $ 47 MILLION WAS INCLUDED IN THE BUDGET FOR
EXPENDITURE IN THE CURRENT FINANCIAL YEAR. AN IMPORTANT PART
OF THE SCHEME IS THE REHABILITATION OF NEEDY FARMERS WHO WISH
TO LEAVE THE LAND. THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS
EXAMINING PROPOSALS FOR A MORE IMAGINATIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE
PROVISION IN THIS REGARD, SIMILARLY, THE FRUITGROWING
RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME, WHICH IS DESIGNED TO HELP FRUITGROWERS
IN FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES TO REMOVE SOME OR ALL OF THEIR TREES
AND EITHER LEAVE THE INDUSTRY OR PUT THEIR LAND TO AN
ALTERNATIVE USE, HAS BEEN EXTENDED FOR ANOTHER YEAR AT AN
ESTIMATED COST OF $ 2 MILLION.
IN THIS CONTEXT, THERE IS ONE PARTICULAR BUDGET MEASURE
THAT I WANT TO EXPLAIN TO You. As YOU KNOW, WE DECIDED TO
REMOVE THE EXEMPTION FROM SALES TAX ON CARBONATED SOFT-DR! NKS
CONTAINING 5% OR MORE OF AUSTRALIAN FRUIT JUICE. THIS DECISION
WAS TAKEN BECAUSE SUCH EXEMPTION WAS THE WRONG INSTRUMENT FOR
ENLARGING THE FRUITGROWER'I S MARKET. ONLY A FRACTION OF THE $ 23
MILLION A YEAR WHICH THE EXEMPTION COST THE GOVERNMENT WAS
RETURNED TO THE GROWER. IASSURE YOU THAT WHILE ASOLISHING THE
EXEMPTION THE GOVERNMENT IS READY TO PROVIDE FIJNDS TO ASSIST
ANY SECTOR OF THE FRUITGROWING INDUSTRY THAT MAY BE ADVERSELY
AFFECTED. THIS HELP WILL PROVIDE MORE LASTING BENEFIT THAN THE
SALES-TAX EXEMPTION WHICH REQUIRES CONTINUING SUBVENTIONS BY
THE TAXPAYER. ./ 11 
11
WE. HAVE TAKEN OTHER MEASURES TO ASSIST RURAL
INDUSTRIES. AN AMOUNT OF $ 20 MILLION WAS PROVIDED IN THE
BUDGET TO FACILITATE LONG-TERM RURAL LENDING BY THE
COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK FQR A WIDER. RANGE OF PURPOSES.
THEY INCLUDE THE FINANCING OF FARM PORCHASES, REPAYMENT OF
SHORT-TERM DEBTS IN APPROPRIATE CASES, AND ASSISTANCE IN CASES
OF FINANCIAL DIFFICULTY ASSOCIATED WITH THE DEATH OF A FARM
PROPRIETOR, OUTSIDE THE BUDGET ITSELF, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN
A WHOLE SERIES. OF DECISIONS THAT WILL BENEFIT THE FARMER. IN
OUR EARLY DAYS, WE SHOWED OURSELVES. READY TO RESPOND TO THE
URGENT NEED TO ENCOURAGE WHEAT PRODUCTION. WE NOT ONLY
ACCEPTED A DELIVERY QUOTA OF 514 MILLION BUSHELS THE HIGHEST
OP RECORD.-BUT ADDED A " FLOATING POOL" OF 20 MILLION BUSHELS
ON TOP OF THAT, READY FOR ANY STATE THAT.. EXCEEDED ITS PORTION
OF THE NATIONAL QUOTA. WE INCREASED THE FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT
ON WHEAT FROM $ 1.10 TO $ 1.20 A BUSHEL FOR THE NEXT HARVEST.
THIS WAS THE FIRST INCREASE IN THE ADVANCE FOR 15 YEARS.
Wœ EHAVE ALSO AGREED TO AN IMMEDIATE PAYMENT OF A SECOND ADVANCE
ON THE 1969-70 CROP. OUR INITIATIVESIN QUICKLY ESTABLISHING
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS-WITH CHINA HAVE BEEN WELCOMED BY THE
. AUSTRALIAN WHEAT INDUSTRY. As YOU KNOW, THE MINISTER FOR
OVERSEAS TRADE, DR. JIM CAIRNSj RECENTLY ANNOUNCED OUR FIRST
LONG-TERM WHEAT CONTRACT WITH CHINA. THE DEPARTMENT OF
PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS NOW WORKING ON A NEW WHEAT* STABILISATION
PLAN TO REPLACE THE ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF THE CURRENT PLAN.
WE HOPE TO IMPROVE THE PROVISIONS FOR STABILISATION. 
r"
THEN 7tH-RE WERE OUR TARIFF CUTS, IN JULY 1973
T* HVE GOVERNMENT REDUCED ALL TARIFF RATES By 257 TO ALLOW
IMPORTS TO EN4TER AUSTRALIA MORE CHEAPLY. IBELIEVE
PRIMARY PRODUCERS WILL REAP SIGNIFICANT BENEFITS FROM THE
TARIFF CUT. IN PARTICULAR IT IS EXPECTED-TO REDUCE THE
PRICE OF A WIDE RANGE OF FARM MACHINERY. ' IT WILL REDUCE
TO SOME EXTENT THE NEED FOR AN ADDITIONAL REVALUATION
OF THE DOLLAR, AND WILL HELP PRIMARY PRODUCERS BY RESTRAINING
THE RATE OF INFLATION AND HENCE THE COST OF LABOUR EMPLOYED
IN PRIMARY INDUSTRY.
IASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT ItN ANY PERIOD OF INFLATION
THERE ARE DIFFICULT PROBLEMS FOR ALL DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED
GOVERNMENTS. IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THOSE IN CHARGE OF
NATIONAL AFFAIRS DURING INFLATIONARY PERIODS OFTEN BECOME
SOMEWHAT UNPOPULAR. TO ACT RESPONSIBLY THEY MUST REDUCE
THE COMMUNITY'IS LEVEL OF SPENDING IN ONE WAY OR ANOTHER.
THEY MUST BRING IT CLOSER TO THE COMMUNITY'S CAPACITY TO
PRODUCE OR IMPORT GOODS AND SERVICES. REDUCING ANYONE'S
SPa NDING IS NOT THE BEST WAY TO COURT POPULARITY YET IT
MUST BE DONE IN THE INTERESTS OF RESPONSIBLE ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT. THE PRESENT INFLATIONARY PERIOD IS IN MANY WAYS
REMINISCENT OF THE WOOL BOOM IN THE EARLY 1950O'S, AT THAT
TIME SIR ARTHUR FADDEN THEN LEADER OF THE AIJSTRALIAN
COUNTRY PARTY AND TREASURER FOUND IT NECESSARY TO INTRODUCE
THE WOOL SALES DEDUCTION TAX, UNDER WHICH WAS DEDUCTED
FROM EACH GRAZIER I'S WOO&amp;~ CHEQUE. 
13
A; YOU MIGHT EXPECT, THIS DIDN'T MAKE ARTIE FADDEN THE MOST
POPULAR MAN IN THE BUSH. I QUOTE FROM HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY:
" CRITICISM OF THIS DECISION ROLLED IN LIKE A TIDAL WAVE,
BACKED BY HOSTILE RESOLUTIONS FROM BRANCHES,. CANCELLED
MEMBERSHIP SUBSCRIPTIONS AND DEMANDS FOR MY EXPULSION."
I AM SOMETIMES RELIEVED THAT I BELONG TO SUCH A GENTLEMANLY
BODY AS THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY.
I MENTION THESE MATTERS TO ILLUSTRATE MY POINT THAT
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED GOVERNMENTS ARE SOMETIMES FORCED BY
CIRCUMSTANCES TO TAKE UNPOPULAR DECISIONS DECISIONS WHICH.
THEY BELIEVETO BE IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE NATION. IT
IS EASY, AT THE PRESENT TIME, TO DEPICT US AS AN ANTI-RURAL
PARTY, TO CONCENTRATE ON THE UNPOPULAR DECISIONS WHICH WE
AVE FELT IT NECESSARY TO TAKE IN THE GENERAL INTEREST, AND
CONVENIENTLY IGNORE THOSE THINGS WE HAVE DONE WHICH
HAVE HELPED THE COUNTRYMAN.
AS A GOVERNMENT WE STAND READY TO HELP AUSTRALIANS
' IV ARE SUFFERING MISFORTUNES WHERE EVERI THEY MAY LIVE ON
FAAINS, IN COUNTRY TOWNS OR IN THE CITIES. IF THE FARMING
COMMUNITY IS AGAIN EXPOSED TO ECONOMIC HARDSHIPS WE WILL R"
PREPARED TO PLAY OUR PART IN HELPING-INDIVIDUALS TO MAKE
THE BEST AND MOST RATIONAL CHOICES AND, IF NECESSARY, CUSHION
THEM AGAINST ECONOMIC ADVERSITY, WE HAVE qLWAYS VOTED FOR
SUCH POLICIES WHEN WE WERE IN OPPOSITION; WE WILL ADOPT 1&amp; EM
IF NECESSARY NOW THAT WE FORM THE GOVERNMENT. IN FEBRUARY TH( S
YEAR WE ANNOUNCED PROPOSALS COSTING $ 10 MILLION TO HELP CHILPA E
IN ISOLATED RURAL AREAS UNDERTAKE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLING.
/ 14 
-14-
PERHAPS I CAN SUM UP MY GOVERNMENT'S BROAD INTENTIONS
BY QUOTING A STATEMENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN WOOLGROWERS' AND
GRAZIERS' COUNCIL, THE COUNCIL HAP THIS TO SAY: " THE MOST
IMPORTANT LONG-TERM STEP THE GOVERNMENT CAN TAKE IS TO
IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF NATIONAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION BY
ENCOURAGING THE EXPANSION OF LESS PROTECTED INDUSTRIES IN THE
ECONOMY ( WHETHER PRIMARY OR SECONDARY) AND DISCOURAGING THE
GROWTH OF THOSE INDUSTRIES WHICH CAN ONLY PRODUCE WITH THE
HELP OF MASSIVE LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE EITHER SUBSIDY OR
TARIFF. THIS WILL INCREASE THE LEVEL OF REAL ECONOMIC GROWTH
FOR THE BETTERMENT OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY,"
I SUGGEST THAT THE GOVERNMENT, IN THE INTERESTS
OF THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE, IS DOING JUST WHAT THE WOOLGROWERS'
AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL SUGGESTED. I BELIEVE THAT OUR POLICIES
WILL BENEFIT, NOT ONLY THE GREAT FARMING COMMUNITY OF THIS
NATION, BUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AS A WHOLE.
-o-o-o-0-o-o-o-



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT PREMIER CHOU EN-LAIPS BANQUET AT PEKING ON OCTOBER 31, 1973
Prime Minister Whitlam's Speech at Peking Banquet, Peking,
October 31, 1973 ( Nsinhua) Following is the full text of the
speech in reply by Australian Prime Minister Edward Gough Whitlam
at the welcoming banquet given by Premier Chou En-lai here this
evening:
Premier Chou En-lai, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Your Australian guests are immensely impressed by the
splendour and warmth of our reception at the airport, along the
boulevard and in the Great Hall of the People.
The days of our staying here two years and three months
ago we will never forget, our reception on that occasion and now
on this. Australia is moving in a new direction, in its relationships
with the world and specifically with the region in which Australia
inevitably belongs. The course that we are setting is already clear
and committed. Our concern is no longer exclusively with nations in
far removed areas of the globe. Now, our concern is with all nations
and particularly those with whom we share a common environment and
common interests and with whom we seek relationships of equality.
In Peking today, we give expression to our new international outlook0
With no nation is our new aspiration symbolised more than it is with
China, a power not only in our region but in the world0 We look to
a future in which over-emphasis on particular associations will no
longer distort the proper relationships which should exist between
Australia and all neighbours0 In our view, this meeting in Peking
contributes significantly towards that future0
China is our close neighbour0 In China today we see a great
modernising force, capable of exerting profound influence in the
world. Close co-operation and association between our two peoples is
both natural and beneficial0 This co-operation this association
will be strengthened by our talks this week in Peking the first
such talks ever between Prime Ministers of China and Australia.
In 1971 a small pa~ rty and I visited China before the first
visit of Dr0 Henry Kissinger only a week before and on this
occasion, I understand, we are visiting China only two weeks before
him. At that time, on behalf of the Australian people, I said that
should I become Prime Minister we would establish diplomatic relations
with China and that I would visit China in my first year of office0
The first promise we fulfilled within three weeks of gaining office.
The second at the ready invitation of Premier Chou En-lai, I am
fulfilling now. Thank you, sir, for your invitation0 For myself
and for those who accompany me, we hope that we may have many opportunities
to return the generosity and hospitality that you and the
Chinese people have offered to us0 
-2-
I wanted to make this visit in my first year of office as a
demonstration of the significance attached by the Australian people
to developing relations with China, and in the belief that our two
countries should now work in concert for the mutual benefit of the
welfare and security of our two peoples.
In China's approach to relations with other countries, we
find a welcome emphasis on the principles of the equality of states
and respect for the r ights and views of small and middle powers0
At a time when profound changes are taking place in the patterns
of international relations, it is particularly important that the
role of small and medium powers should be understood and appreciated,
and that they should seize the opportunities for greater independence
which the increased fluidity of the world situation presents to them.
In this context, China's support for the principles of respect for the
national sovereignity, independence and territorial integrity of all
states can make a significant contribution to strengthening peace.
These fundamental principles we support and as we work together for
their implementation, our two countries will be drawn into closer
co-operation. We hope and expect that our two countries, in a
relationship of mutual trust, will work increasingly together to
secure respect for these broad principles in the affairs of the region
which touches both our countries.
Australia shares China's desire for a fully effective
solution to the Vietnamese conflict and China's desire that the Paris
Agreements should be fully implemented by all parties concerned0
Similarly, both countries look forward to the early restoration of
peace in Cambodia0 The Governments of both our countries have welcomed
the agreements reached between the parties concerned in Laos and we
share a desire that the correct implementation of these agreements
will ensure peace in Laos.
We are both concerned that the different social systems
of the countries in the region should nut inhibit the flow of ideas
and that greater consultation and dialogue among these countries may
remove the barriers of misunderstanding and lessen the possibility
of international conflict.
As relations between China and Australia develop, the
continuing importance of expanding trade will be balanced by the
development of close contact over a broad range of political issues.
Consultations on international questions of interest to both countries
are adding substance to our relationship0 Exchanges in the scientific,
technological and cultural fields will expand and buttress ties between
the two countries0 Our relationship will not be exclusive but will have
relevance beyond our purely bilateral concerns. For we believe that
there are great benefits for all in putting aside the rigidities and
animosities of the cold war era and grasping the opportunities
inherent in the more open framework of relationships now developing
in the world, to build a structure of cooperation based on mutual
respect and mutual trust. 00o/ 
-3-
In this spirit, ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to join
with me in a toast in honour of Chairman Mao Tsetung, in honour of
acting Chairman of the Republic Tung Pi-wu, in honour of Premier
Chou En-lai in honour of the heads of the Diplomatic Missions and
their wives, in honour of all distinguished guests present, to the
continued happiness and well-being of the Chinese people and to the
friendship between Australia and the People's Republic of China. 



SPEECH BY THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER,. MR L. H. BARNARD
AT THE OPENING OF THE TASMNA DIVISION O
THE MUNICIPAL ASCAO'S CONFERENCE IN
LAUNCESTON -5 NOVEMBERJ 1973
Today I am talking to you about our new deal
for Local Government in Australia.
We are not seeking changes for changes sake
nor, as some would say, to centralise power in Canberra.
What we are really dging is to give a new and realistic
meaning to Federalism, real local participation in public
affairs and in effect, real decentralisation of Government.
The Australian Government is moving quickly to
develop its policies for Local Government and the cities.
Our commitment to Local Government is an important part of
our overall commitment to urban and regional development.
I think most of you here today know about the three
specific promises which the Labor Party made to Local Government
while in Opposition.
Firstly, we promised direct Local Government
representation at the 1973 Constitutional Convention. You
will all be aware that on the Steering Committee of that
Convention there was some division over this question.
we remained firm to our commitment and I am pleased
that the outcome was successful and that Local Government was
represented at the convention.
Secondly&gt; we promised to change the Loan Council so
that Local Government representatives from all States could
have a voice and a vote on that Council.
On the 11th of last month the Prime Minister met
the State Premiers to resolve this question. Unfortunately,
some of the Premiers ( not including Tasmania) would not
accept our proposal. But we are not going to let the matter
rest there. We now propose to ' hold a referendum on the matter
early next year. I
Thirdly, we promised to amend the Grants Commission
Act to authorise the Commission to enquire into and make
recommendations on grants to regional groups of Local
Government. In May, we changed the Grants Commission Act
which will give some relief for Local Government areas. You
will remember that Mr Whitlam has been speaking for years
about the Grants Commission doing a similar exercise for
regions in need within the States as it now does between the
States. No one doubts the strength of Local Government'. s
case for more financial assistance.
Under the new Grants Commission Act some relief is
in sight for Local Government areas. Let me turn now to some
aspects of the Grants Commission operation. 
We should be quite clear that the responsible
Minister under this legislation is the Special Minister
of State, Senator Ddn Willesee.
I know that people in Local Government would'
like the grants from the Commission to flow through as quickly
as possible. But we must all realise the difficulties. The
Grants Commission now has to adapt to its new role, recruit
extra staff and work out how it is going to deal with
applications from Local Government.
When the Commission is ready to begin considering
applications an announcement will be made.,
On present indications this might not be before
January next year. In the meantime a handbook is being
prepared to assist regional organisations in drawing up
their submissions. Another colleague of mine, Mr Tom Uren, the Minister
for Urban and Regional Development, has two important
responsibilities in this area.. Firstly, he is responsible
for approving regional groupings of local councils through
which submissions to the Grants Commission must be made.
Secondly, he can comment to the Commission on the
submissions from regional groups. In this way, Mr Uren can
inform the Commission on how the applications may be assessed
in the light of the Australian Government's overall regional
planning and development objectives.
What we are trying to do is to encourage councils
to think big. Certainly far bigger than they have in the
past. We hope that this new move of ours will provide an
effective and useful fillip to bigger regional planning.
As you know, the Department of Urban and Regional
Development has already made some tentative grouping of
regions. We expect that Local Government will want to make
some comments to the Department through the appropriate
Minister in each. State. The appropriate Minister in Tasmania
is, of course, Mr Michael Barnard. I would like to emphasise
that at this stage the suggested regions are tentative. This
is because we can in time carry out longer investigations.
Also we expect to gain a lot of experience in the first couple
of years in the working of the Act.
In its investigations the Department has found that
regions already adopted by the various State Governments for
the rural sectors in each State will probably be suitable for
purposes of the Grants Commission Act.
As a general rule the State's regions have been taken
as the main basis for approved regional organisations in nonmetropolitan
areas.
I would like to stress again that the report being
sent out to all Councils is designed to encourage comment
through the appropriate State Minister on the suggested
regions. We will also have the benefit of experience
before we decide on the final regions after a couple of years. ./ 3 
These are still very early days in our new approach
to urban and regional development generally and Local
Government in particular.
We must make sure that we act quickly because the
needs are both great and urgent. But, on the other hand,
we must also make sure that we take notice of the views of
Local Government representatives. All of us must try to
make sure that we take notice of the views of the citizens
we all represent. I have already mentioned the role played by the
Grants Commission and the requirements for regional groupings.
But these are small elements of the Australian Government's
plan for a new federalism.
The Department of Urban and Regional Development is
charged with the responsibility for the development and
implementation of national and regional development strategy.
It is also charged with the development and monitoring
of an urban and regional budget programme to co-ordinate
resources allocated for investment in urban and regional
services by federal departments, state and local governing
bodies. The Department of Urban and Regional Development
has a role in the administration in the Grants Commission Act.
But it will be guided by a wider concern to promote effective
regional development and to improve generally the resources
of Local Government so that it can operate efficiently.
Unfortunately we are being thwarted in our attempts to advance
the role of Local Government by the attitudes of some State
Premiers. on this issue it is not the Federal Government
which is adopting a centra ' list stance but some of the States.
We want to give an effective say to local populations on local
matters. We want to give, local populations an effective say
about the things that immediately concern them. We are not
being allowed to and that is why we are being forced to go to
a referendum so that Local Government has direct access to the
Loan Council. These are just a few thoughts on what we are doing
in this important area. They have been Labor Party policy
for some time. We are fulfilling the-promises made many years
ago. I think we are on the verge of an exciting new era for
our third tier of Government in this country. Whatever way
you may look at it, it is certainly the best deal that Local
Government has ever had in our living memory.
Thank you for having me. It has been a pleasure to
be here today to give you a progress account of what's
happening in this field. By the time you meet again no
doubt a lot of the administrative problems will have been
sorted out but most importantly I hope that the Australian
people will have decided to support your cause and give you
direct access to the Loan Council and therefore the means
to put into practice imaginative plans. 



THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, ADDRESSING THE
NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, HOTEL CANBERRA, CANBERRA,
THURSDAY, 8 NOVEMBER, 1973
QUESTION: Following your conversation in Peking with Prince Sihanouk,
can I ask you what is the Australian relationship now with the
Royalist Government in Cambodia? Has Prince Sihanouk been given
any assurances? Has he been told, for instance, that his Government
will be recognised if the Lon Nol regime were to fall?
PRIME MINISTER: Australia maintains relations with the Lon Nol
Government. As I said in Peking, and many of you were there when
I said it, it will continue to do so as long as that Government is
in the United Nations and Pnom Penh. Prince Sihanouk knows that
that is our attitude and that while he is the Government-in-exile
he can't, of course, expect to be recognised as the Government of
his country by the Australian Government.
QUESTION: What are the areas about which there is'still
speculation following your visit to Japan. Is your statement that
we would aim for and desire 100 per cent ownership-of our four
energy resources. Could you clarify what you meant by that? Are
we intractably wed now to a policy of developing those resources
without foreign equity, and do you believe we can do that?
PRIME MINISTER: I hope that we can do it; we will certainly try.
It ought to be possible to strive for that objective, i. e. for
100 per cent Australian ownership of uranium and oil and natural
gas and black coal.
QUESTION: In the last twelve months you have travelled more than
any other Prime Minister in a similar period; you have achieved
possibly all your major immediate policy objectives. I understand
that next year you intend to visit South-East Asia early in the
year and also Europe later in the year. Do you think now that
Senator Willesee could be given these two missions while you
concentrate on domestic matters at home?
PRIME MINISTER: I would add that I expect to visit the United Nation
in about September. I will be making these visits and Senator
Willesee will be continuing to make no fewer visits than he has
been making throughout the year. A head of government these da-,' s
inevitably has to make a great number of visits. I don't believe
that I will be making fewer visits that I had intended to make
in any case.
QUESTION: My question follows on that asked by David Barnett
and it is in relation to a statement that was issue3d in Pcking
by Prince Sihanouk. To clarify the position one step further,
Prime Minister, has Australia cut military and econor-Fi-I t~ o
the Lon Nol regime, has it limited its diplomatic nr-s-ice therc.
and are you looking forward to Prince Sihanouk beinr1 installed
back in Pnom Penh? 
-2-
PRIME MINISTER: In respect to the last question, it is not for
me to express a view. It is for the people of Cambodia, I hope,
to choose their government without outside interference. I will
read what I said in Peking at the press conference in answer
to your question on this subject:
While I was in Peking where Prince Sihanouk resides, I
welcomed the opportunity to have an exchange of views
with him. He is the acknowledge spokesman of GRUNK AND FUNK.
He is the only representative of either who is known to
me or to the ambassador or to Australians in general.
It was a valuable opportunity to hear at first hand his
views on the situation in his country and in the region.
I was asked: " It doesn't suggest any change in our
recognition of the present Lon Nol Government". I answered:
" No, as long as the Lon Nol Government is in possession
of the capital of Cambodia and is ' in the United Nations
the present Australian attitude towards it will continue."
I was asked: " How are we voting in the United Nations".
I answered: " We have been abstaining on the procedural
issues." I was asked: " Will we continue to abstain?"
I answered: " When the question of the seating of the
Government arises, we will vote for that Government with
which we have relations but we-are abstaining on the
procedural matters. We did not oppose the inscription
of the item. our concern in Cambodia is that the people
of Cambodia should have a government of their own wish.
We will do all we can to put an end to the hostilities
and to deter any supplies from outside. It is the only
part of Indo-China where there has not yet been a ceasefire
or an agreement or an accord. This is all the more
deplorable since, for so many years, from the Geneva accords
of 1954 until the invasion of Cambodia by and from South
Vietnam in March 1970, Cambodia had enjoyed an undiminished
peaceful identity."
There was one specific question you asked me about military
and economic aid. The military aid ceased last year within a
couple of weeks of our coming to office, as it did throughout
Indo-China. The economic aid, in the sense of support for the
currency, will end at the end of this year. Colombo Plan aid
continues, and will.
QUESTION: May I take your mind of f foreign affairs? The Senate
has rejected, unacceptably amended or unreasonably delayed items of
important Government legislation. The prospects are that it will
deal in a similar fashion with the National Health Scheme or the
Schools Commission. In this sense, the Senate is preventing your
government from implementing important matters which you pledged
in your policy speech. How long can your Government tolerate a
hostile Senate, and what do you propose to do about it? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER: I won't put our opponents out of the position
where they have to wonder about this. The situation has arisen,
as you know, that whenever we like we can have a double dissolution.
The objectionable feature of the Australian constitution and of
most of the State Constitutions it has never been applied in
Australia is that the Upper House can send the Lower House to
the people without going to the people itself. The Upper House
in the Australian National Parliament can do that twice a year.
It can do it before the end of November when the Budget for the
financial year has to be passed; it can do it before the end of
June when the interim supply up until the end of November has to
be provided. I can do that at any time. If it does it, it will
go to the people not only the House of Representatives. That
position is available to the Australian Government.
QUESTION: On page three of your stat-ement,-you said in illustrating
your foreign policy, that you start with the basic thesis that
the crucial factor governing the well-being. of the West Pacific
region is the relations between China, Japan and the* United States.
There is another great power, sir, which has a. . coastline in this
particular area, the Soviet Union. It also has a great deal of
shipping in the Indian ocean region tand in * the North West Pacific.
To what extent do you take the role of the Soviet Union into
account in this basic premise of yours, and whet role do you think
Australia should and does have vis-a-vis the Soviet Union?
PRIME MINISTER: I' am speaking of the passage you quote about
the relationship between Australia and Japan. It is there that
Australia can help very greatly in relationships between Japan
and China and between Japan and the United States. When we were
there over two years ago, relations between Japan and China were
almost-as bad they were between China and America and China
and the Soviet Union. Also, in the interim, relations,
particularly on economic matters, Australia's relationship with
Japan can help relationships between all these three. Australia
does not have the same leverage or influence with the Soviet Union
as it has with Japan or as it has with the United States. However,
there is the situation that a detente to a considerable extent has
been established between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It might have been badly shaken by the Middle East war but it seems
to have been restored. The centre of Soviet power and influence
is not in the Pacific. Obviously, the centre of Chinese and
Japanese influence is in the Pacific. The fact that Russian
shipping of both naval and maritime kinds is to be found in tc
Pacific and in the Indian Oceans is a completely natural and
expected development because the Soviet Union is the second largost
economic force in the world.
QUESTION: Why did you feel it necessary to st: lc own -as Foreig4n
Minisc'-er. Do you regret the decision? 
-4-
PRIME MINISTER: The answer to the second one is yes. Of course,
I would have liked to have been Foreign Minister; I have been
the greatest that they have had in the last generation! The fact
is that it is not just the paper-work that takes up your time,
which is what people usually say; it is the number of calls that
one has to receive. Quite frankly, if you look at the number of
visitors coming to Australia -many times as numerous as has
happened in any previous year -it is just beyond me to receive
as Foreign Minister the number of foreign ministers who call.
Senator Willesee was doing an immesne amount of this work but
QUESTION: May I clarify what appears to be some ambiguity in your
central statement in Tokyo concerning foreign investment in our
energy resources, mentioned by Mr Barron uranium, oil, gas and
coal? You spoke of the possible need for more foreign money
for exploration. Will foreign capital be permitted to explore all
those energy resources in Australia and-* if they find these energy
resources in Australia will they be permitted to own and develop
them? PRIME MINISTER: It may be necessary or desirable to have overseas
interests participating. It largely depends on the cost or the
skill of finding resources. We don't really need much assistance
from outside to discover uranium or black coal resources. We
obviously could not by ourselves have found all the oil or
natural gas resources. This much is clear: that whatever
participation there may be required, permitted or desired in
exploration, there will be Australian control in the exploitation,
the development; and that is understood. I wish those who so
easily fall for handouts from public relations people in Australia
or from some companies in Japan would face up to the fact that the
Japanese have wondered why we have taken so long to do in our
country what they long ago always, in fact had determined to
do in their own.
QUESTION: In the areas where the Commonwealth, quite clearly,
asserts control, in the Northern Territory in the off-shore oil
region, when these leases expire, is the Labor Government going
to impose conditions that those who tender for it will have to be
Australian owned? In other words, where you do have unquestionable
control, are you going to insist upon, at this stage, 100 per cent
Australian control and ownership of exploration of our energy
resources? PRIME MINISTER: I don't think I need add anything to what I said
in Japan, handed out there and tabled in the Parliament yesterday.
QUESTION: The indications are that your Government has suffered
a severe drop in support since the election. Do you accept that
this has happened? If so, how do you account for it and what
are you going to do about it? 
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, there has been some drop in our support. If
there is an election, whenever it is, we will regain it. Anybody
reading or listening to the censure motion a couple of weeks ago
will see my grounds for optimism and assertion in that respect.
QUESTION: It would not have escaped your attention, sir, that
Mr Barton has offered you membership of the Australia Party. Have
you got any observations on this? Also, can you confirm or deny
the very strong and persistent rumours that the Liberal Party has
also offered several of its leading members membership of the
Australia Party?
PRIME MINISTER: I have to answer no to both of those questions.
QUESTION: Did you discuss in Peking with ei -ther Mao Tsetung
or Chou En-lai the question of Sino-Indian relations?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: What were the discussions -what was the'-tenor of
the discussions?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't want to go into any detail about what
was said there. It was a general course of informing each other
of our respective attitudes over recent years and at the present
time but I don't feel free to go into any further detail on such
matters. I think we discussed every country in Asia except, thinking
over it, Iraq.
QUESTION: Can you explain why you see a need to have a senior
party official on the staff of the Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: I need and welcome the best men to work for
me that I can get. I believe I have got them.
QUESTION: Your joint communique issued after your talks in
Peking suggested that Australia and China regarded all nations,
small and big, as equal and respected their rights to maintain
their territorial integrity. Well, with your Middle East policy,
one could be forgiven perhaps for believing that some nations
are more equal than others, particularly if they have oil. Do you
regard that as a fair interpretation?
PRIME MINISTER: It is not a fair interpretation, and I wouldn't
have believed that anybody covering the scene in the Australian
capital could hold that view. The Australian Government has been
neutral in the Middle East, and preceding Australian Governments
were neutral too. I am not reflecting on McMahon, Gorton, Holt
or Menzies because they were all neutral their Governments also.
The Australian Government has maintained the policy, traditional
in Australia, of neutrality in the Middle East dispute. Wc. were
in a position to be of particular effect because the Australian
ambassador to the United Nations was in the chair -in thie Security
Council during the crucial month of October an ' d I i,-) ald like to pay
tribute to him for what he did, because the final solutior, it
will be remembered, came from the non-permanent members of the
Security Council and he was instrumental very largely in bringing
about that solution. 
-6-
QUESTION: Were any of the United States bases in Australia at
North West Cape, Pine Gap or Woomera put on a normal alert prior
to the general American alert of its overseas bases? If so, were
you told and when were you told? Secondly, when all the American
overseas bases were put on a higher level than normal alert, when
were you told and was it before the NATO partners were told?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know if they were put on alert. I wasn't
told. I believe the announcement was for domestic American
consumption.
QUESTION: Both Bob Hawke and Dr Coombs have suggested that an
increase in direct taxation would help curb inflation. Are you
considering this, and do you regret that you made an election
promise that you wouldn't increase taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: I will not be drawn on-. making promises, yes or
no., on any fiscal matters. Dr Coombs, as is'well-known, did
suggest an increase in taxation as a means of curbing inflation
as far back as June or July. His advice was not accepted.
Mr Hawke's advice was not sought; it will not. be sought.
The Government makes up its mind on this matter. The President
of the Federal Executive of the Labor Party does not determine
such matters; he is not consulted in such matters; he doesn't
speak for the party on such matters; I doubt if on this matter
he speaks on behalf of the trade union movement.
QUESTION: Can you tell me why you have offered a post on your
personal staff to the former Federal secretary of your party,
Mr Mick Young?
PRIME MINISTER: I answered a previous question on this. I said
that I want on my staff, working with me, the best people available
in Australia, and I believe I have them. The combination of
Young and Whitlam was superb, and it will continue to be.
QUESTION: Many people would think it was unfortunate that you
used the term " final solution" in relation to what the United NationE
was doing. I wondered if you could say something more about what
you claim is a neutral policy. Firstly, why is it necessary for
you to so carefully refuse to condemn what was quite clearly the
Arab initiation of warfare on Israel? Secondly, I wonder if you
would answer a question about whether Australia had urged the
U~ nited States not to re-supply the Israelis with arms and
equipment when the Russians were re-supplying their allies there?
And, finally, could you tell us whether you raised with the Chinese
the question of their wholehearted support for the Palestinian
terrorist movement by way of propaganda, training and armaments? 
-7-
PRIME MINISTER: I discussed the question of the Middle East
in Peking. You have been told that that was so; I was asked a
question in Parliament about it yesterday. The attitude of the
Australian and the Chinese Governments is known and it is unchanged.
It was discussed; it is unchanged in each case. Now it is quite
spurious than one can come to any sound view or one can produce
any solution to the disputes in the Middle East by looking at
any one particular date. The fact is there is a situation which
has continued there for quarter of a century and there are certain
features of it which have to be solved if it is to end. One is
the question of recognition of the existence, the sovereignty,
of Israel.. One is the question of the occupation of Arab
territories by Israel. And the one which people mention least
is the Palestinian problem not just the question of Palestinian
terrorism, but of people who lived in what used to. be called
Palestine and no longer live there.
QUESTION: What about the other questions I asked you?
PRIME MINISTER: The attitude of the Australian Government was
made known before I went to Japan and China on this. I said at
question time there that there should not be supplies from
outside and that applies to both. The war would never have broken
out, it would never have continued, but for supplies from outsideby
the Soviet Union and the United States; and they both recovered
their sanity in time to save us all.
QUESTION: Some months ago you said you did not believe that the
Watergate scandal could happen in Australia, referring to the
fact that the Executive was answerable to the Parliament. Do
you believe that the machinery for mid-term elections under
parliamentary democracy would prevent such events happening in
Australia? PRIME MINISTER: I frankly don't see the link between the statement
I made some time ago and the position that you are now putting.
I don't see the link between them. What I was referring to some
months ago was the fact that I believe that the situation in
America, whereby the Head of State and of government is isolated
from the legislature and very often from the press and gatherings
like this, means that that head doesn't discern trends in public
opinion in time. I am under no illusions that questions that
you gentlemen and ladies ask me are your own inspirations, created
in isolation. It's very useful for me to know what you have in
mind. It warns me of things in time. I believe there are virtues
in the British system which save us from a position such as the
Watergate scandal.
QUESTION: Yesterday a Senate Committee was very critical of the
operations and limitations of the Government's much-vaunted Prices
Justification Tribunal. Could you tell us whether you intend to
take any action to overcome these criticisms and to make the
tribunal more effective? 
-8-
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't read the Senate report on this matter.
There have been some criticisms made of the Prices Justification
Tribunal; I don't believe they are justified. I believe the
appointments we have made to the Prices Justification Tribunal,
Mr Justice Williams, President Chambers and the lay members, have
been excellent appointments and I believe the tribunal is developing
procedures which are of very great benefit to the Australian people.
There have already been many price rises projected or sought which
have then been abandoned because of the existence of this tribunal.
I admire the way the tribunal is carrying out its functions. I see
at this stage no reason at all why its statute should be altered.
If however, it is in any way defined, then, with the powers I
expect to get on 8 December we will reinforce the act so as to
buttress the tribunal. It is a very fine tribunal indeed. It
deserves our support and the support of the Australian people. We
are all very much better off because of its operations, already.
After all, it has only operated for four months; it has already
had a very salutary effect indeed.
QUESTION: You have visited almost every important capital in the
world except Moscow. Do you feel in view of the sensitivity of
relations between China and the Soviet Union, Soviet leaders might
feel justified in believing they have been left out in the cold
by the warmth of your welcome in Peking? Do you have any plans
to visit Moscow?
PRIME MINISTER: It has been brought home to me that the Soviet
Government does have some feeling that they are being neglected.
There are limitations even on the most active head of government.
I was asked earlier whether I would be visiting Europe. The capital
of the Soviet is in Europe; I expect to be visiting it together
with several otier European capital3 in the date mentioned in the
o;. o Jout next June. Perhaps it would be useful to
in-tor . tiir for you the pattern of the visits I have made this
_ ecar. T., e y Iargely dictated by geographic propinquity
or by particuJar events to which Australia would be expected to
subscribe. I first went to New Zealand; I then went to New Guinea
dnd Indonesia; I then went to the South Pacific Forum and for
various constitutional reasons to Westminster and Windsor, and
to keep the ecclesiastical balance to be completely ecumenical
I visited Rome, and on the Orthodox Good Friday, Rhodes. Then
North America because there was the Commonwealth Heads of Gcvernmen'
Meeting in Ottawa. Before that I visited Mexico the first Latin
American country ever visited by an Australian Prime Minister and
Washington and New York. I should have mentioned India just
before that. Then Japan and China. It will be seen, I believe,
that there has been regard paid to priorities of geography and
traditional associations.
QUESTION: You were reported to have sid th.-t the Chinem crow-d
that spontaneously greeted you on your arrival in Peking reacted
with rapture to the strains of Waltzing Matiidno I wonder 0. et: er
you would consider extending the sample of inii. o 1 that tho -' ria
of Census and Statistics is going to take out ' n lke Art-an
population on our National Anthem to Po-ing,. o \. hther
personally favour Advance Australia Fair? 
-9-
PRIME MINISTER: I'm only one voter in this respect. I doubt
whether I will be among the 60,000 polled in February by the
Statistician on the matter. I find it very difficult to make up
my mind between Advance Australia Fair and Waltzing Matilda.
Waltzing Matilda I would think is very much the more exciting tune
but a very great number of people seem to be worried by the words.
I don't think they understood them in China, although realising
the economic and ideological basis of the words, it would probably
have been even more rapturously received. Many people think it is
quite indecent in fact, subversive to have a song. with words
such as Waltzing Matilda. There apparently are people who, whenever
they hear God Save the Queen played, decide to sing it. Anthems
are mainly for t1e music alone, not the words, and it is possible
to create other words. There are lots of different words for
God Save the Queen, the Americans have one set and the Hohenzollerns
used to have another set; and it is the same tune.' Now what I'
said in China in the House yesterday -about Waltzing Matilda
being more rapturously received than Advance Australia Fair may be
due to one or other of two factors. The one is that when Advance
Australia Fair was played in Peking, we all stood to attention;
it would have been unseemly to cheer. That-broke out immediately
the tune finished it might have been for the tune or it might
have been for the Premier and Prime Minister. Trhe other reason
may be, of course, that when Waltzing Matilda was played in the
Great Hall of the People there were equal numbers of Chinese and
Australians present. I couldn't discern which section was more
rapturous. QUESTION: Accepting that you want the best people working for
you and accep,,; ng that you believe you have them, could I ask
you specifically what will Mr Young's role be when the brilliant
' Yt-. r-Young :~~ esi: is re cons tituted? Could you tell us
lm~ y what job will be, what his title will be, what his
u~ ary wiill hu ~ fyou can) nd, what you hope to see him achieve?
you see him as the miracle w-. orker who will recover that lost
popularity? PRIME MINISTER: I don't know how to describe the role that
Mick Young performed last year and the year before he did it
thiough. I don't know how I will describe his role from now on
but he will perform similarly " superbly" was'the word I used,
not " brilliantly".
MR OAKES: It was my word.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I will accept it if you say it is your
word, but I'm too modest to apply words like that to myself and my
closest partner. It was a great combination the best in Australia
political history for the last quarter of a century and I believe
it will prove a similarly superb combination unt'll the next House
of Representatives election when, I expe. 2t, Nick Young will bc
a Member of Parliament and, I hope, a inister. 
QUESTION: At any time did you invite either Chairman Mao or
Premier Chou En-lai to visit Australia and, if so, did either
of them accept it?
PRIME MINISTER: I answered this question in Peking and I suppose
I could read it out to you but the gist of it is this: Premier
Chou En-lai knows quite well that he would be very welcome in
Australia as he would be in any country in the world. I think
there are over a hundred pending invitations. Our invitation,
of course, is less than a year old he wouldn't have been
invited before that. But other people got in ahead. There are
some office holders in the world who can't reasonably be expected
to accept all the invitations extended to them. It's no courtesy
to press an invitation, say, on a President of the United States
or the Premier of the People's Republic of . China. They can't
be expected to accept those invitations. They would, obviously,
in each case, be very welcome. There will be visits each way
by ministers, and senior officials between China and Australia.
We have overcome those inhibitions of the last twenty-three years
that lost generation. At last, relations between Australia and
China are as warm as they should have been throughout.
QUESTION: Did you get the impression in China that the Chinese
attitude was " You come to us, we won't go to you"?
PRIME MINISTER: Not in the least. As a matter of fact, it was
a Chinese minister who visited us before an Australian minister
visited China, and there will be just as many visits each way.
The Chinese are courteous people. This is not a matter of
ideology; it is a matter of historic habit and they don't
patronize other people. k* 



EMBARGO: 9.00 P. Ml.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. EG, WHITLAM, MP,,
AT THE LORD MAYOR'S BANQUET, MELBOURNE TOWN HALL,
FRIDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 1973
IT IS JUST ONE WEEK SINCE I WAS SPEAKING AT A BANQUET
IN THE GREAT HALL OF THE PEOPLE IN PEKING, Now I AM IN THE GREAT
HALL OF THE PEOPLE IN MELBOURNE. I ASSURE YOU I FEEL PERFECTLY
AT HOME IN BOTH THESE GREAT SEATS OF POWER, AMONG THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF THESE TWO POWERFUL RULING ELITES. ONE FINDS THE SAME WARMING
INFLUENCES OF FOOD AND WINE TO BRIDGE THE GREAT GAP IN IDEOLOGY.
ONE FINDS IN PEKING, IN MELBOURNE, THE SAME PERMANENCE, THE SAME
SOLIDARITY, THE SAME SELF-CONFIDENCE WHICH CHARACTERISES ALL GREAT
ESTABLISHMENTS. THE MANDARINS OF MELBOURNE ARE AT LEAST AS FAMOUS
AS THOSE OF PEKING. AND ONE INDEED FEELS SOMETHING OF AN
INTERLOPER, A MERE PRIME MINISTER AND ONE FROM SYDNEY AT THAT.
I COULDN'T HELP BUT FEEL, LAST YEAR, AS I SAT LISTENING TO MY
DISTINGUISHED PREDECESSOR, THAT A PRIME MINISTER FROM SYDNEY EVEN
A CONSERVATIVE ONE WAS NOT EXACTLY TAKEN TO THE HEARTS OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE MELBOURNE ESTABLISHMENT. ONE IS MADE VERY AWARE
PRIME MINISTERS COME AND PRIME MINISTERS GO BUT YOU GO ON FOREVER.
NEVERTHELESS, THERE HAS BEEN SINCE YOUR LAST BANQUET
A CHANGE IN AUSTRALIA'S GOVERNMENT. As I LOOK AROUND, I SEE HOW
MANFULLY YOU ARE BEARING UP UNDER THE WHIPS AND ARROWS OF OUTRAGEOUS
FORTUNE WHICH HAS PLACED THE SOCIALISTS IN CANBERRA. I MIGHT EVEN
SAY YOU LOOK AMAZINGLY PROSPEROUS AND INDEED IF I CAN BELIEVE THE
FINANCIAL PAGES AND THE ADVERTISING PAGES OF THE GREAT MELBOURI\ E
DAILIES, MOST OF YOU ARE, AND I CAN TELL YOU WITH ABSOLUTE CONFIDENCE,
THAT YOU WILL REMAIN SO AS LONG AS I REMAIN PRIME MINISTER, I DON'T
REALLY THINK ITS DIFFICULT TO LEARN TO LIVE WITH EACH OTHER, AND I
THINK YOU MIGHT EVEN COME TO ENJOY IT. 
-2-
I FOR INSTANCE, FIND I CAN LIVE WITH YOU PREMIER. I HAD
OCCASION TO SAY YESTERDAY IN REFERENCE TO MY HAVING GIVEN UP THE
FOREIGN AFFAIRS PORTFOLIO THIS WEEK THAT WE HAD GOT RIGHT THE GREAT
AREAS OF OUR INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES, WITH
JAPAN, WITH CHINA, WITH INDONESIA, INDEED, THE ONLY SIGNIFICANT
UNSETTLED AREA OF OUR DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH A HOSTILE POWER IS
THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND. BUT YOU PREMIER WILL EVEN COME TO
DINNER WITH ME. I KNOW HE HAS DIFFICULTY WITH SOME OF HIS
MINISTERS, BUT WHEN WE SPEAK TOGETHER, AND WHEN HIS MINISTERS SPEAK
WITH MINE, WE CAN WORK TOGETHER.
THE MOST IMPORTANT AREA OF CO-OPERATION CONCERNS THE
PLACES WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS, WHERE MOST VICTORIANS LIVE IN
THE CITIES AND CENTRES, AND IN THE AREA OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SO WELL
REPRESENiED HERE TONIGHT. WE HAVE THE BOLD SOCIAL EXPERIMENT IN
IMPROVING THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT AND OFFERING A GREATER CHOICE TO
THE PEOPLE OF VICTORIA AT ALBURY-WODONGA. WE ARE CO-OPERATING
WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT, IN ITS OWN PLANS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF GEELONG AS A GROWTH CENTRE. THE PREPARATIONS ARE PROCEEDING
JOINTLY AND BOTH GOVERNMENTS HOPE WE WILL BE ABLE TO EASE THE
PROBLEM OF MELBOURNE GROWTH EARLY AND SUBSTANTIALLY, WE HAVE MADE
A GREAT DEAL OF MONEY AVAILABLE THIS YEAR FOR ACQUIRING STRATEGIC
AREAS OF LAND FOR URBAN RECREATION AND CONSERVATION AT W4ESTERN-PORT
BAY, THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA AND THE DANDENONG RANGES, WE ARE
CO-OPERATING IN ESTABLISHING A CONTINUING MAJOR PROGRAM TO RETARD
THE RISE IN RESIDENTIAL LAND PRICES IN MELBOURNE. WHEN THE
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ON THE ' ATIONAL ESTATE
REPORTS, WE CONTEMPLATE IMMEDIATE ACTION IN CONSULTATION WITH
VICTORIA TO FOLLOW UP IN VIGOROUS SUPPORT OF THE STATE'S NATIONAL
TRUST AND PRIVATE CONSERVATION ORGANISATIONS, 
4 -3-
DISCUSSIONS ARE NOW WELL ADVANCED WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL COUNCILS ON SPENDING TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN
THE DEPRIVED WESTERN SECTORS OF MELBOURNE, LOCAL COUNCILS HAVE
BEEN ACTIVE IN FORMING AMONG57THEMSELVES A ', ESTERN ; REGIONS COMMISSION.
11E ARE ALSO WORKING WITH THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT ON A'JOINT
STUDY ON THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROVISION
OF LOCAL SERVICES ON. A STATE-WIDE BASIS. I PERHAPS SHOULDN'IT
MENTION SO INDELICATE A SUBJECT HERE BUT WE ARE WELL ADVANCED IN
REACHING OUR GOAL OF OVERCOMING THE BACKLOG IN SEWERAGE BY 1980.
IREMEMBER WHEN I FIRST HAD THE TEMERITY TO RAISE. THIS AS A NATIONAL
ISSUE, JOHN GORTON SAID I SOUNDED LIKE A jIAYOR OR A-SHIRE PRESIDENT
RATHER THAN A NATIONAL LEADER. IDON'T KNOW IF I WAS MEANT TO BE
INSULTED, BUT I WASN'T. THE NEW GRANTS COMMISSION IS IN BEING
TO HELP MEET THE GROWING NEEDS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TO REDUCE
INEQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS,
SO THERE HAS BEEN THIS WIDE RANGE OF CO-OPERATION ON
URBAN AFFAIRS. WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO IS TO MOVE AWAY FROM THE
CONVENTIONAL IDEA THAT THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS ARE LIMITED TO THE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIP
IN TERMS OF SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT BRINGS TO THE CONFERENCE TABLE MUCH MORE THAN ITS
CHEQUE BOOK. IT BRINGS NATIONAL ATTITUDES, A SENSE OF NATIONAL
OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITIES. IT BRINGS NATIONAL ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT
AND NATIONAL ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES, OF COURSE OUR TWO GOVERNMENTS
DON'T ALWAYS AGREE, BUT ALREADY IN THIS YEAR OF 1073 TII'-HAS BEEN
ESTABLISHED A NEW AND EFFECTIVE PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
VICTORIA IN A CONCERTED THRUST TOWARDS SOLVING OR AT LEAST REDUCING
THE GREAT PROBLEMS OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT, SO CENTRAL TO THE WELLBEING
OF THE VAST MAJORITY OF OUR PEOPLE. 
-1t
I MIGHT JUST SAY THIS: ONE OF THE REASONS WHY MANY
PEOPLE, PERHAPS EVEN SOME OF YOU, FEEL DISCOMFITED BY THE PROCESS
OF CHANGE, IS JUST THAT FUNDAMENTAL FACT THAT THERE WAS NO CHANGE
FOR SO LONG, THAT THERE WAS NO CHANGE FOR 23 YEARS. IN THIS WE
WERE UNIQUE AMONG THE ENGLISH SPEAKING DEMOCRACIES. THERE HAD TO
BE CHANGE AND PROBABLY THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN MANY OF THE SAME CHANGES
MADE, PARTICULARLY ON MATTERS AFFECTING RESOURCES AND INVESTMENT
EVEN IF THE GOVERNMENT HAD NOT CHANGED LAST DECEMBER. THE SEEMING
STABILITY OF THE PAST WAS LARGELY ILLUSORY, ARTIFICIAL,
REFLECTING AN ESSENTIALLY ABNORMAL, THOUGH LONG ENDURING, POLITICAL
SITUATION. IT IS CHANGE WHICH IS NORMAL AND NATURAL IN
PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY. I THINK IF YOU ACCEPT THAT BASIC FACT,
YOU WILL FIND LIFE UNDER LABOR PREDICTABLE AND REFRESHING AND
IT MAY EVEN BE, AS I CERTAINLY FIND IT, EXCITING AND
EXHILARATING FOR US ALL AS AUSTRALIANS. 



THE SIR ROBERT GARRAN MEMORIAL ORATION
" AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT"
BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
CANBERRA, 12 7.4OVEMIBER, 1973
Let me say simply that it is a great honour to deliver the
Garran Memorial Oration in 1973, 14 years after my father delivered
the inaugural Oration. I know how deeply he felt honoured by the
invitation to inaugurate the series of lectures to honour his great
former chief. You will understand something of my feelings at this
moment when I use my father's words of 14 years ago to introduce the
1973 Oration. My father said this of Robert Garran:
" It was an exhilarating experience, for to me he was always
more than a high official, more than a skilled Parliamentary
Draftsman, more than an erudite constitutional lawyer, more
than a figure of social importance; to me, as to others,
he was a person of remarkable distinction.
" As a permanent head it was a real satisfaction and a pleasure
to discuss a problem with him. In the less complex matters,
so long as one was thoroughly prepared with the ascertainable
facts, and was able to present them concisely and in their
proper relation and proportion and indicate the contingencies
and this was what he would expect his conclusion was
unhesitating and decisive.
" In the more complex matters, where principles were involved
which required discussion, the discussion was free, subject only,
of course, to the limits of relevance; there was, on his part,
no restriction to orthodoxies or conventional thinking but a
hospitality to all ideas that might have a bearing on the problem
in hand, an enlightened weighing of pros and cons, and a firm
choice of the course to be pursued."
Those words well describe a great public servant, the
ideal public servant. They certainly described Sir Robert Garran.
It is more than perhaps filial loyalty which allows me to say that
they came aptly from their author. It is not without significance
in my own career, in my own attitude to the Public Service, to the
role of the Public Service, the duties and responsibilities of the
Public Service and to the role of Government, that I lived my boyhood
here in Canberra as the son of a great public servant among whose
colleagues were great public servants and that I am Autai'
first Prime iMinister with that particular background.
Sir Robert Garran's place in the annals of the Australian
nation is as unique as it is distinguished. 
-2-
The first ten years of his public career coincided with
and were inspired by Australia's march to nationhood, an event
in which he played an important, if secondary, role at the time,
as secretary to various committees promoting the federal movement.
Garran' s energy and creative genius were immediately
channelled into the establishment of the new nation. He was
appointed Secretary to the Attorney-General's Department, in whi h
office he served over a period of thirty-one years, and from 1910
held also the office of Solicitor-General.
A significant and lasting contribution by Sir Robert
Garran is, of course, to be found in The Annotated Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, the authorship of which he shared
with Sir John Quick.
As one of his successors in the office of Solicitor-
General, the late Sir Kenneth Bailey, has written:-
" The work at once became a classic. Ever since, no careful
opinion on an Australian Constitutional point has been
written without seeing what " Quick and Garran" had to say
about it." Any of us who have studied the law or been involved in
public administration would, I think, agree with this view.
Garran saw the adoption of the Constitution not as an
end of a process, but as a beginning.
If Garran took justifiable pride in the work of the
Constitution, as the outcome of 10 years' work, and saw it as a
suitable basis for a national government, he nevertheless recognised
its inadequacies and saw that as time passed, as circumstances
changed, so it would be necessary for the Constitution itself to be
amended. In his posthumously published autobiography Sir Robert
remarked " that hitherto amendment of the Constitution has been
piecemeal and that something more systematic is now needed."
I shall not tonight be dealing very much with the
Constitution but I think it worth recalling the words of one who
had so much to do with its framing and its interpretation. It
is worth recalling that he had no illusions about the inadequacies
of the admittedly very great work in which he participated.
There has been a convention on the Constitution this year. There
are to be re ferendums to amend the Constitution next month. Last
week I introduced bills for three amendments and foreshadowed a
bill for a fourth amendment which will be put to the people next
year. I have to say, however, that given the experiences of the
Convention in Sydney in August, given the political difficulties
in attaining any amendment and the difficulties even of getting a
referendum for an amendment put to the people, then I have to
concede that the consummation of Sir Robert Garran's true, wise
and absolutely accurate remarks will be reached only with the
greatest difficulty. To balance that seeming pessimism, let me say
that a determined Government, a Government clear on what it wants to
do for Australia, can find means of living with the Constitution.
The Constitution imposes great limitatio ns but the Constitution is
not an alibi. 
Garran joined the Public Service in its infancy, along with
many other able men from all walks of life who were inspired by the
creation of the new nation.
He joined the service of Australia at a crucial time, for
public servants, as for politicians, at a time when the demands on
the creative capacities of all those engaged in nation-building
were very great. There are demands, similar in magnitude, pressing on us
today in the challenging environment of the Seventies.
Tonight I wish to speak principally about the role of the
Australian Public Service under a Labor administration, as that Labor
administration responds to the immense challenge imposed upon it
by the decision of the Australian people just under a year ago.
It is not always realised that Australia itself was in a unique
positio n in the English-speaking democracies. None of those other
democracies Great Britain, the United States, New Zealand, Canadahad
been for so long without a change of Government. In the United
States one would have to go back to the Republican hegemony of 24
years from the election of Lincoln to the election of Cleveland.
In Britain itself, from which we take both our Parliamentary system
and our civil service tradition, one has to go back to 1807
to the Tories under Liverpool, Canning and Wellington, from 1807
to 1832 to find a comparable period of unbroken rule by a single
party. That so ancient a parallel has been equalled only in some
of our Australian States may not be without its relevance.
However that may be, it should be recognised that our situation
when we came into government was unique in modern English-speaking
democracies, unique in the Australian National Parliament, unique
for an Australian National Government and unique for the Public
Service responsible to that Parliament and that Government. Yet
this change, unique in so many respects, coincided with and indeed
was largely created by, a desire for clear and rapid change on the
part of the Australian people. The demands upon Government,
upon administration, are greater than they have been at any time in
human history. All governments are expected to make changes and
deliver benefits with a precision and promptitude never before
expected or experienced in history. When a new government comes in
after so long an absence, those demands, those pressures are
accelerated and intensified.
I have sometimes quoted the complaint of Garran' s
co-worker and part-contemporary, Alfred Deakin, about " the
impossibility of governing with a reporter at one's elbow".
He had a lot to complain about at the same time he was complaining
he was, even as Prime Minister of Australia, the anonymous regular
correspondent and reporter for the London Morning Post. No television,
no tapes. Politicians are not so blessed today.' There can be no
doubt that in modern times the immediacy of the media itself is a
strong force generating change and sometimes irresistible pressures
for change by raising exceptionally high expectations about the
potential and performance of administrations. 
-4-
For any Government to measure up to these expectations
and to meet these pressures it was inevitable that there would be
changes in the administrative structure.
It is inevitable that political change will bring with
it administrative change in terms of modern politics. This is
not to say, at all, that our Public Service has to be politicallyorientated,
or motivated. It does not.
We as a Government were and are anxious to maintain the
fundamental tradition of a non-political Public Service in the true
sense. This is not to say that public servants will not be involved
in matters relating to politics, rather that their involvement will
be as loyal, as dedicated and as intense regardless of what
Government is in power.
Some doubtless were sceptical whether this tradition
could be maintained. Could the administrative machine that had
been controlled by our political opponents for 23 years respond
to a significant political change to a Government charged with
urgently needed reforms and impelled by a philosophy which involved
a shift from long-established positions?
No doubt the Public Service was equally anxious to see
whether we would be able to adjust effectively to the business of
government, how we would go about the task of governing.
But the significant political change does involve a shift
from long-established positions; it does require an administrative
response of a different order. It is not a difference of a political
order; the difference lies in the magnitude of the challenge.
Under this Labor Administration, the outstanding need
for change, restructuring and expansion arises from our particular
view of the role of the national government. We assert that the
national government has responsibility for a whole range of matters
which under previous Governments were deemed either to be the
responsibility of State Governments or the responsibility of no
government at all. This basic approach of ours was, I believe,
upheld by the people at the election. It is exactly one year ago
tomorrow since I delivered the Policy Speech which outlined our
program. In that speech I said:
" Before this campaign is out, I shall have completed
years as a member of Parliament. The basic foundations of
this speech lie in my very first speeches in the -Parliament,
because I have never wavered from my fundamental belief that
until the national government became involved in great matters
like schools and cities, this nation would never fulfil its
real capabilities."
And in the penultimate paragraph I said:
" We shall need the help and seek the help of the best Australians.
We shall rely of course on Australia's great Public Service, but
we shall seek and welcome the advice and co-operation from beyond
the confines of Canberra." 
These sentences do I believe encapsulate the course
that has been pursued by this Administration, in its program and
in choosing the men and women to carry out this program.
Administrative and Advisory Support for the Government
In opening the first session of Parliament on 27 February
the Governor-General said the Government saw the importance of
certain principles upon which we should base our program for
change. One of these principles was the need for Government to
have available machinery and advice to plan for the inevitable and
accelerating change now occurring in all modern communities.
The tradition of democracies based on the British model
is that elected governments have available to them a career
Public Service which is politically neutral and designed to give
administrative support and advice to whatever government may be
in office. But in addition, it has been practice to rely along
with the Service on other forms of support. One of the marks of
our first twelve months is the extension and deepening of that
kind of support to enable us to meet the challenges of office.
In broad terms, the system of support which we have
developed while in office is a blending of five elements
The Public Service, impartial, responsible
and professional
Task forces and Committees of enquiries, with
all or a large part of the membership consisting
of outside experts, highly competent in their
particular fields
Commissions and other continuing authorities,
drawing staff from inside and outside the
Service investigating and managing new areas
of Government initiatives
A new form of long term priorities advise a
" think-tank" which we have named the
Priorities Review Staff
Consultants and outside advisers for Ministers.
The Public Service
My Government took over a large and efficient Public
Service which, since its foundation at the start of the century,
has built up a reputation for efficiency and probity which
places it in the front rank of the Civil Service Systems of
western democratic countries. 6/ 
-6-
The Government was, however, elected to carry out its
declared policies and it quickly set about the task. It was not
until after the election that the leaders of the Labor
Parliamentary Party the new Ministers were able to seek the
help of the Public Service Board and others in the Public Service
on how the Service should be restructured. Some difficulties were
encountered, and to an extent these difficulties could be
attributed to some lack of understanding on the part of the
Government and the Public Service of each other's purposes and
processes. In the interests of good Government, I have since
announced that, as long as I am Prime Minister, there will be an
opportunity for pre-election discussion on the structure and the
working of Departments between Members of the Opposition and
senior officials. Naturally, these discussions will not embrace
matters of a party political nature. They will simply ensure
that whenever there is another change of Government, the changeover
as it affects the nation's administration, will take place
as smoothly as possible.
In retrospect, the quite massive changes which can be
seen as reflections of the underlying new orientation of our
policies were brought about with reasonable speed and remarkably
little friction. The changes were by no means revolutionary; they left
the system and the principles on which it is based intact, but
they were substantial and are beginning to have their effects
in achieving our purposes.
All the important changes can be seen as reflections
of the underlying new orientation of our policies. What we have
done is to re-structure departments of state to accord more with
the thrust of these policies. We have brought an emphasis in
departmental strength to accord with the emphasis in the
Government's administration. In so doing we have moved in the
direction of organising departments on a functional basis, of
distributing responsibility in groups which are as homogeneous
as possible. This has led, in part, to the amalgamation of
departments which is now in process.
I am aware that amalgamation as a process can come under
question. I am aware of the problems of size and in particular
the problems of manageability for a single minister and a single
head of department. I am aware of management problems, of staff
morale problems, and public relations problems.
But set against these problems and far outweighing them,
are the advantages of unification. There are the economies
resulting from the reduction of inter-departmental barriers
e. g. the resolution within a single department of the differences
that arise notoriously between separate and competing
departments. There are internal economies economies of scale. .7/ 
-7-
But the primary factor as I see it, determining the size
and manageability of large departments, is coherence of subject
matter. It is this coherence that has prompted many of the
structural changes that we have introduced.
Take transport. For too long, we have seen responsibility
f or transport divided between the Australian Government and the
States, without effective co-ordination between the four main arms
road, rail, air and sea. At the Australian level, we are now
moving rapidly towards the amalgamation of the Departments of
Civil Aviation and Transport.
The desirability of amalgamating the Departments of
Transport and Civil Aviation rests on the improvement which is
to be expected in the development and co-ordination of general
transportation policies, the more effective determination of
expenditure priorities and resource allocation and on the greater
ability to harmonise the totality of transport activities with
the Government's other objectives in economic and social fields.
A size problem may arise associated with air and sea navigation
systems. To meet this eventuality we intend to establish
operating agencies functioning separately from Departments.
Take Defence. We are fully aware of the importance of
a highly efficient and mobile defence force. But equally, we
are aware that there is no immediately foreseeable threat to the
security of this country. We are bringing together under the
one administration what should after all be an integrated system
of defence of our country and its interests, and in so doing, are
following the example of other countries. So here again, the
changes we have made in the administration have reflected basic
policy objectives. We are in the process of planning the amalgamation of
the Departments of Works and Housing. This amalgamation will
give us another more co-ordinated way of achieving important
policy objectives in housing and construction areas.
We are considering abolition of the Department of
Supply with transfer of its functions to Secondary Industry
and other areas.
Restructuring of the public service is also evident in
the field of social welfare. Here we have attempted to move from
the fragmented system of our predecessors to a broader concept of
caring for the total needs of an individual. To this end, we
have brought together in the remodelled Department of Social
Security many functions previously handled in other Departments.
And by stripping the Department of Health of a complicated system
of national insurance and payment to individuals, we are allowing
it to concentrate on the important problems of medicine and health,
and on health care delivery. 8/ 
7
-8-
In other areas the achievement of our objectives has
called f or the establishment of new Departments. Each of these
Departments is a viable unit, necessary for the attainment of
the Government's policy aims and new initiatives.
The greatest single area of new initiative is in the
cities the places where most Australians live. The time has
come for us to take fresh initiatives in making our cities
places where people can achieve the fullest enjoyment and self
fulfilment in living, as well as to work efficiently and without
unnecessary inconvenience. For this purpose, we established the
Department of Urban and Regional Development. This Department is
at the centre of some of the most important of our policy
initiatives. Here again, we have an example of a Department
comprehending a wide but wholly coherent subject matter.
In my Policy Speech last December, I foreshadowed the
establishment of a separate Department of Aboriginal Affairs
to have offices in each State to give the Australian Government
a genuine presence in the States. The Department of Aboriginal
Affairs is now a fact and is working to give effect to the will
of the people as expressed overwhelmingly in the 1967 referendum.
The Department of the Media will be able to work more
closely with the radio and television industry and for instance
have oversight of the legislation which regulates the industry.
Let me describe what we have done in the words of the new head
of the Department of the Media, himself a man brought from
experience in the business and television world to head our new
department. Mr. Oswin said
" Coming to a decision to form a Department of the
Media didn't mean starting everything from scratch.
A lot of its components already existed and many
of them were functioning efficiently and well, but
they were all over the place responsible to
departments with which they had little in common..."
was a matter of bringing together under a
common Ministry, Government services that were
often misplaced and regrettably, even neglected."
The Public Service has responded magnificently to the
challenges we have set it. But it would simply have been unable
to achieve all that we require in the time available. So, while
retaining it as an expanding administrative centre for all our
activities, we now have working with it in varying relationships,
or independently, many new bodies to provide specialistic
assistance to the Administration. 9/ 
There is a further question beyond that of the limits
on the professional public service to carry out all the tasks
required, in the time required. It is in Australia' s interest
and in the interest of the Public Service itself that there
should be greater mobility between business and the universities
and between the federal and state public services. For a job in
the public administration to be done competently it is not always
necessary that the appointment be for life or retirement on
reaching a certain age. Clearly, many valuable men and women
will be unwilling or unable to accept appointment on those terms.
Sometimes a specific task involved is of limited duration. The
task should not be left undone or the skills lost through
inflexibility in the Public Service structure.
Task Forces and Other Inquiries
To help us to focus quickly on the many new areas of
policy initiative, we have brought in academics and practical
men from the private sector.
First, there is the task force. In the main, the object
of the task force is to produce in a short time a report by a
person of stature in the community who is not part of the regular
Public Service. We have provided him with assistance some from
the. Public Service itself and some from our valued group of
consultants and Ministerial advisers with the object of
assembling material quickly and without the problems associated
with departmental boundaries.
The result has been a series of most helpful reports.
The concept of the task force is in the main that the leader
of it assumes responsibility for the report. The task force
helps and advises him but doesn't blunt the acuteness of his
own perceptions and the purport of his policy recommendations.
Perhaps the best known of the task forces was that led by
Dr. Coomnbs, in his investigation of the continuing expenditure
policies of the previous Government with a view to finding room
for our own higher priority programs. Another task force worked
under Mr. Rattigan, Chairman of the Tariff Board and produced the
report which led to the 25% cut in tariffs.
I believe the task force technique to be a most effective
way of producing a high quality report in a short time which
combines the skills and insights of prominent citizens with the
background and experience of the actual working of the Government
machine which officials and ministerial advisers can contribute.
Second, there is the committee of inquiry. In this area
men and women from many walks of life have joined new commissions
and committees; since we came into office, no less than 70 short
term inquiries have been appointed. To mention a few, they range
from inquiries into Aboriginal land rights, to an inquiry into
the Burdekin, into the maritime industry, into the protection of
privacy, into employment statistics, into FM radio, into
rehabilitation and compensation, into legal aid, into nursing
home fees and into the components of growth in urban centres. 
The use of specialist commissions and committees of
inquiry serves a number of valuable purposes. These include:
immediate action on a wider range of issues than would otherwise
be possible, many being issues where the electorate, having
given us a mandate, is wanting quick results;
availability of specialised skills and advice not always
required on a bng-term basis;
access to advice and information on developments and research
in industry, academic institutions, the trade union movement
and other community areas;
fostering of co-operation with, and participation by the States,
a matter of special importance in our Federal system of government;
providing a key channel of communication between Parliament
and the people.
Some might argue that some of the matters dealt with
initially in this way could properly have been dealt with by existing
departments. However, such a course would have meant an unbearable
strain on the Service because of the wide range of new matters,
many of which the Service had not been asked to deal with before.
The Service has been and is fully occupied responding
to other initiatives of the Government, as well as ensuring the
normal conduct of business.
The response by talented people of wide experience outside
the Public Service to join us in our endeavours has been quite remarkable.
I mention just a few.
Mr. Justice Woodhouse, of the New Zealand Supreme Court
came to head the Inquiry into a National Scheme of Rehabilitation
and Compensation, and his colleague Mr. Justice Meares from the
Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Mr. Justice Else-Mitchell, Professor Mathews and Mr.
G. J. Dusseldorp on Land Tenure;
Sir James Vernon and others on the Post Office Inquiry;
Mr. Justice Hope and a number of others on the Committee
of Inquiry into the National Estate;
Dr. Scotton and Dr. J. Deeble on Health Insurance;
Mr. McGarvie on Discrimination in Employment and
Occupation together with a number of others including Mr.
G. Polites from the Australian Council of Employers'
Federation and Mr. J. Petrie from the A. C. T. U.
I invite your attention to the range of the inquiries
as well as to the names of those conducting them. 
-11-
With the active co-operation of State Governments, we
have been able to secure the services of several State judges to
chair some of these committees.
In making appointments we have, we believe, succeeded
in bringing together people with relevant expertise from all
sections of the community.
Committees of Inquiry have, of course, been used in the
past. But the record shows that the system has not always been
well used I need only mention the fate of the Report of the
Committee of Economic Enquiry whose members were Sir John Crawford,
Professor Peter Karmel, Mr. Kenneth Myer and the late Mr. D. G.
Molesworth under the Chairmanship of Sir James Vernon or the McCarthy
Committee on Dairying. Not the least regrettable feature of the
treatment of the Vernon Committee report at the hands of the then
Government was that it must necessarily have reduced the willingness
of men and women of the highest qualifications, men and women with
very great demands on their time and experience, to serve in a
similar capacity. Whilst I am realistic enough to know that all
recommendations of Committees of Inquiry cannot necessarily be
adopted at least immediately our intention is a positive one.
Most reports are published and acted upon, not shelved
and forgotten. A real contribution is made to public
administration and to the development of policies acceptable to
the community. In this way we are restoring the use of inquiries to
their proper role in Government.
Commissions and Other Continuing Bodies
The willing response of the Public Service and the
efforts of task forces and other instruments of inquiry would not
in themselves have been sufficient to achieve our purposes. So we
have added greatly to the range of support which in greater or lesser
degree has always been associated with government in the field
of statutory commissions and other such authorities.
Since we have taken office, we have made decisions to
appoint no less than 25 continuing bodies to assist us in achieving
our policies. Those already at work include such diverse bodies
as the Cities Commission, the Child Care Standards Committee, the
Commission on Consumer Standards, the National Pipeline Authority,
and the National Commission on Social Welfare. Others are awaiting
the passage of legislation to enable their establishment, for
example, the Industries Assistance Commission and tne Petroleum and
Minerals Authority. The Interim Committees for the Schools
Commission and the Pre-School Commission have advanced their work
quite splendidly, while awaiting their establishment as statutory
bodies. These bodies will in part be supplied from the Public
Service. But in part they will draw to them men and women of
experience in their calling. They will be freer to operate than
the Public Service itself, though necessarily functioning within
the broad framework of government policy and administration. These
are performing a task of administration, often in new and uncharted 
-12-
areas, which will have important and positive effects on many areas of
life and activity in the community.
The Priorities Review Staff
One of the difficulties of government is to ensure
continuing challenges to think and plan more than a few months ahead.
There is a real danger that, unless there is a constant input to
government on this side, the day to day pressures will lead to
shorter and shorter term policies, to government that is reactive
rather than inspirational in quality and therefore loses its sense
of direction and purpose. We believe that the best way to maintain
an effective input of longer term thinking is to establish special
machinery for the purpose. It is true that particular Departments
will think months and years ahead and indeed the Treasury for
some time has been preparing three and five year estimates. But
that is not enough.
What we have done is to establish a new group within
the Department of the Special Minister of State which we are
calling the Priorities Review Staff. It consists of highly skilled
specialists with high academic and professional qualifications.
Its purpose is to review Government programs, not with
the object of duplicating or censoring the work of specialist
departments, but with the object of advising ministers on long-range
priorities and planning. It is based on the well-established
Priorities Review Committee headed by Lord Rothschild in Great Britain.
This venture, I believe, marks a significant step
forward in orderly national management and long-range planning. 
-13-
Ministerial Staff
As the business of government grows faster and the
range of political involvement of the people extends, Ministers
must necessarily look to more help from their own immediate
offices. It has been traditional to think of the Ministerial
Private Secretary as an efficient and experienced officer of
middle rank, capable of maintaining effective liaison with the
Department and of seeing that the Minister is where he needs
to be to keep his many commitments.
But with the present need to develop and maintain
new policy initiatives involving people outside the Department
and the authorities associated with it, we have found a need
to provide Ministers with greater help on the policy side.
I have no hesitation in saying that the help Ministers have
obtained from their offices has relieved Departments of
involvement in party political matters and has given ministers
support as they have forged ahead in their own particular fields.
In machinery terms, we have improved the quality of the
contribution made by Ministerial staff by increasing both the
numbers and the salaries paid.
Noalte e iiseilstaff have come from outside
the Public Service. There is provision in each Minister's staff
for a departmental liaison officer who remains on the departmental
establishment and undertakes duties directly connected with the
Department. This preserves an avenue for able young departmental
officers to gain valuable experience in the operations of government.
Ministers, of course, are free to choose their staff and many
of them have made personal staff positions available to career
public servants. I have, this year also arranged for substantial increases
in both the numbers and levels of staff available to the
Opposition parties. Again, in my view, this was a very necessary
change. I might point out that the Ministerial personal staff
from outside the professional Public Service have no security of
tenure. They depend wholly on the whim or fate of the Minister.
In no sense can they be said to have been obtruded into the
structure of the Public Service. They are part of the Government
in its political and personal sense and in that sense, they are
responsible to the people, their paymasters and political masters
in the same way as Ministers. 
-14-
I should further point out that this development
in no way represents a departure from the principles of the
Westminster system. Central to that system is the principle
that Ministers as individuals and the Cabinet as a whole must
exercise real control over the Public Service and accept full
responsibility for policy. In Australia, the staff of Ministers
has, for various reasons, remained far smaller and junior than
in Britain or Canada. In Britain, the Minister is supported by
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries and by Parliamentary Private
Secretaries as well as a far larger staff. The function of the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary is deemed unconstitutional in
Australia. It is a perfectly objective statement to say that
there have been notable cases in Australia in the past of a
remarkable lack of ministerial control over departments and
over policy. The lack of competent staff undoubtedly contributed
to this. The Canadian model has been descrined as " politicallvorientated
yet operationally sensitive" staff and a " non-parti'san,
operationally-orientated yet politically sensitive" department.
We have not of course adopted that model, but to the extent
that the appointment of a competent personal staff assists
ministers to exercise their proper constitutional authority
we are enhancing the basic Westminster tradition.
Implications for the Public Service
All this means that government is on the move.
I recognise that this imposes strains on the Public
Service. Perhaps there are two particular problems which I
might discuss in a little more detail in the remaining time
available. These relate to the process I have described, by
which many new people and authorities are being added to the
familiar administrative scene; and the emphasis we are placing
on open government. First, the influx of new people and new skills. During
the war years, feeling were expressed which, although more intense,
were much the same as those of which I am aware today. They
relate to the fears which permanent public servants have because
of the possibilities that their own career prospects will be
diminished, or the standards of the Service lowered, as a result
of the influx. It is true that the sweep and pace of the recent
changes have hardly been equalled in peace time in Australian
history. Though as I say this I should make the point I do not
expect the growth of the Public Service in 1973-74 to be more than
This is a figure which has been exceeded on several recent
occasions. You will all be aware of the task force I set up under
the leadership of Dr. Coombs which identified for the Government
a number of areas of spending that could be reviewed. His report
concluded: ' Existing government programs are taxing the resources
of the Australian Public Service and it is clear that
it will be subject to increasing pressure. Administrative
and management skills are important and scarce resources.
It is essential that the cost of existing and new expenditure
programs in terms of these skills be taken into account in 
Government decisions and that every effort should
be made to use such skills to the best advantage...
The Public Service Board as the primary authority on
establishment matters must be given a sensible degree
of control in seeking to establish a reasonably uniform
classification structures and to avoid the competitive
ways destructive to wage-justice and reasonable economy
in Government. The fact that the Board should recognise
special competitive elements in particular situations
does not invalidate the need for such control. This
control, with appropriate modifications to deal with
special circumstances, is relevant also to the agencies
outside the Public Service itself such as statutory
corporations.' Some of the additional staff on the payroll of the
Australian Government will merely be a transfer from other places
where, in one way or another, the taxpayer is footing the Bill;
for example Health Insurance now administered by more than
100 private bureaucracies.
The history of the war and immediate post war years
may be of some encouragement, because there is general agreement
that the Public Service today is as efficient as anywhere in
the world, and probably more efficient than most.
During the war years the size of the public service
doubled and the number of departments grew from 13 to
There was great pressure on the public service,
which did not have many of the skills required.
Various people were brought in from outside the
public service, perhaps the most notable being the late Essington
Lewis, then Chief General Manager of Broken Hill Propriety Limited,
who became Director-General of Munitions, but there were others,
including Lawrence Hartnett, another great industrialist.
New people were brought into such areas as rationing,
prices control, manpower control, credit control and censorship,
which were established under National Security Regulations.
Numerous Boards and Committees were set up also to
facilitate communications between agencies, to carry out desired
executive functions or to conduct investigations into specific
topics. Many of the people brought into the public service
in that period attained high office. To mention only some of
the now retired Permanent Heads, there were Sir Kenneth Bailey,
Sir Henry Bland, Sir Allan Brown, Sir John Crawford, Dr Coombs,
Professor Fin Crisp, Mr Ted Hook and Sir Richard Randall.
There are others among them who are still serving in high office,
including a number as Permanent Heads.
We seek more men of their calibre for the tasks of
today, for we are engaged on a new operation mercifully in
a period of peace. 
-16-
There is a new light on the hill, if I may recall
a phrase of the late Ben Chifley, and we need all the skills
we can command as we move towards it.
With the introduction of new people and new skills,
the existing Public Service is placed in a more competitive
situation both in relation to competition for higher jobs and
competition for influence in the policy making process.
I see only advantage in increased advertising of
senior Public Service positions as open to people outside the
Service, and indeed I agree with the report of the Boyer Committee
that the morale and self respect of the Public Service could
only be enhanced i-f it felt it were standing on its own feet
by force of merit rather than by restriction of competition.
I am sure, from what I have seen of it, that it can so stand.
We have not altered the traditional role of the
Public Service in the policy making process, but by greatly
increasing our sources of policy advice and by involving public
servants in our task forces and commissions, we have provided
for a meeting of minds, a re-stimulation which is coupled with
a leadership from the political level. Where this has resulted
in tension it has in the main been creative tension and that is
our object. The Public Service has not only demonstrated in
the last twelve months that it can work impartially for a
new Government after 23 years with the old, it has for the
most part shown the benefit of its inter-reaction with the
Government's other advisers and an enthusiasm for working with
others in pursuing the policies of an activist Government.
Perhaps the change in Government had its greatest Public
Service implication in relation to the Permanent Heads of
Departments. Unlike all other public servants, Permanet Heads
are appointed by the Government of the day. They have a
continuing tenure but they also have close personal dealings
with their Ministers.
Before the election there was talk of wholesale sackings;
some observers seemed to expect that we would change the Public
Service by replacing its leaders. This did not happen and at
no stage did we consider it desirable. On some occasions,
associated not only with changes of Government but with, for
example, reshuffling of portfolios in existing Governments, it
is desirable that Permanent Heads be transferred to other
Departments or other duties in the interests of good Government.
Like previous Governments, we have made some changes at the top
of the Service, but this has been done in a manner which does
not damage the tradition of an impartial Public Service.
We all tend to think of the Permanent Head as a policy
adviser. Important and glamorous as this aspect of their work
undoubtedly is, it should not be allowed to obscure the very
real responsibility that Permanent heads carry as general managers
of departments under their Ministers. 
-17-
Permanent Heads should be ever mindful of the
need for ensuring that their departments are efficiently
managed, of the need for cost-effectiveness, of their role
in ensuring that staff savings are achieved where possible,
and of the need for leadership of their departments in
such matters as ensuring that personnel are developed to
meet -emerging needs of public administration.
Open Government Greater participation in the affairs of Government by
concerned people in the community generally has been a theme
in this lecture. We want to extend this sense of participation
far beyond the use of particular individuals who have skills
currently needed. We want the Australian people to know the
facts, to know the needs, to know the choices before them.
This is really at the heart of what has been called " open
government". There come times and we recognise this when
decisions must be taken, or are better or more quickly taken,
if there is not at every stage a need for the decision makers
to discuss publicly and explain publicly what they are doing.
A balance has to be struck. I think we are striking that
balance. I myself am reporting regularly to the press and
telling them promptly of decisions that we are making.
We are tabling reports in Parliament, not just the annual reports
of statutory bodies but many papers providing useful general
information where there is a public interest and where other
interests are not compromised.
Legislation foreshadowed in my policy speech as the
Freedom of Information Act will be shortly before the Parliament.
Meanwhile, much is already being done to provide greater information
to the public, particularly by the release of various reports.
At the same time, the Government is very aware of the need to
ensure adequate privacy for the individual.
A review is in train of the legislation to remove
unreasonable restrictions on public servants which inhibit
them from discussing in public matters of public and official
interest. There will still be a proper observance of the
conventions that public servants do not justify or propagandise
policies. That is the job of Ministers. But within the
proper conventions there can be a lot done to relieve public
servants of unnecessary restriction.
We will be bringing down archives legislation which
will clarify the rules relating to access to official records
and facilitate such access. It will also greatly improve the
service that the public gets when they want to consult some
of the more ancient records.
Another aspect of the involvement of the community
generally in government is the benefit which can flow in
both directions from extended arrangements under which staff
of the Public Service spend periods in industry, commerce,
universities and the like and for people from those areas
to spend periods attached to Public Service departments. 
-18-
I quote the Fulton Committee. It had this to Aay
' Determined efforts are needed to bring about the temporary
interchange of staff with private industry and commerce,
nationalised industry and local government on a much
larger scale than hitherto. War-time experience proves
beyond doubt the value of such movement in promoting
mutual knowledge and understanding.'
At the same time, while I intend to see arrangements
developed in this area, it is only proper to note also the
warning given by the Fulton Committee that the exchanges should
take place in a professional atmosphere, fostered by the
fact that the majority of public servants expect to make a
career of their period in the Service. They should not see
themselves, or be seen, as in the prospective employment of
business, or something of the necessary confidentiality and
privacy which governments must preserve and protect will be lost.
It is a truism that we live in a changing world.
It is essential that the whole framework of public administration
in Australia be geared to respond to new initiatives of government
demanded by the electorate.
An important factor in this will be the continual
exchange of ideas and discussion of techniques between the
sectors of the economy.
The public sector, which has much to learn from the
private sector, will facilitate this.
But it needs the co-operation of the private sector,
whose interests today demand a better knowledge of the working
of government than ever before.
It may be true that the people get the government
they deserve. It is certainly true that governments get the
Public Service they deserve. The measures, decisions and approaches
I have outlined are designed to promote the efficiency, the
excellence of public administration in Australia, now and for
the future. I close as I began, with a quote from the inaugural
Sir Robert Garran Oration:
" The task before Australia is honourable, and its
efficient discharge would make for a dynamic peace;
to it all the resources, skills and energy that Australia
can command deserve to be committed. The honourable task,
however, could become majestic, and infinitely inspiring,
and the peace could become creative, deep and rich,
and enduring, if there be added what I have termed
Excellence, Excellence in all its fullness."
The pursuit of excellence is still an eminently proper
and desirable goal for Australia, her people, her public
Administration and I believe, her elected Government.
-0-o-0-



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE
TASMANIAN COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION1
HOBART, SUNDAY 18 NOVEMBER, 1973
I MUST CONFESS THAT IT IS A NOVEL EXPERIENCE FOR
ME TO BE INVITED TO OPEN AN INSTITUTION THAT HAS BEEN IN
EXISTENCE FOR FIVE YEARS. ICOMMEND YOUR PATIENCE AND
FORESIGHT IN WAITING SO LONG FOR THIS OPPORTUNITY.
NATURALLY I WAS DELIGHTED TO ACCEPT YOUR INVITATION
BECAUSE I KNOW THAT THIS COLLEGE, FORMALLY ESTABLISHED
IN 1968, IS AMONG THE MOST PROGRESSIVE AND COMPREHENSIVE
INSTITUTIONS OF ITS KIND IN AUSTRALIA. THE ADVANCED
EDUCATION ACT OF 1968, BY WHICH THE COLLEGE WAS ESTABLISHED1
WAS AN IMPORTANT AND FAR-SIGHTED STATUTE. IT CREATED A
COUNCIL OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN TASMANIA WHICH ADMINISTERS
NOT ONLY THIS COLLEGE BUT THE WHOLE FIELD OF ADVANCED
EDUCATION IN THIS STATE. i e / 2 
-2-
THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE COUNCIL, SET
FORTH IN YOUR HANDBOOK, ARE CLEARLY ATTUNED TO SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC NEEDS AND THE ASPIRATIONS OF A GROWING
AND DYNAMIC COMMUNITY, I CONGRATULATE ALL THOSE WHO
HAVE WORKED TO ESTABLISH THIt COLLEGE AND LAID DOWN THE
PRACTICAL AND ENLIGHTENED PRINCIPLES ON. WHICH IT IS
CONDUCTED, I DON'T THINK THERE CAN BE ANY DOUBT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S WHOLEHEARTED COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION,
THE STRENGTH OF THAT COMMITMENT AND OUR READINESS TO
DISCHARGE IT HAVE BEEN DEMONSTRATED OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
WITHIN A FEW WEEKS OF TAKING OFFICE WE SET UP THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS COMMISSION; WITHIN A
FEW MONTHS OF ITS APPOINTMENT THE COMMITTEE PRESENTED ITS
HISTORIC REPORT; WITHIN THREE MONTHS OF RECEIVING THAT
REPORT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IN ' ITS FIRST BUDGET,
PROVIDED AN ADDITIONAL SUM OF $ 404 MILLION FOR EDUCATION IN
1973-74. THAT WAS AN INCREASE OF 92% ON LAST YEAR, THE
GREATEST SINGLE UPGRADING OF EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES IN
OUR HISTORY, THUS WE HAVE HONOURED THE PROMISE IN MY
POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO THAT EDUCATION WOULD BE THE MOST
RAPIDLY GROWING SECTOR OF PUBLIC SPENDING UNDER A LABOR
GOVERNMENT, 
-3-
I HOPE I WILL NOT BE ACCUSED OF UNDUE COMPLACENCY OR
SELF-SATISFACTION IF I SAY THIS: WHATEVER ELSE MY
GOVERNMENT MAY ACHIEVE IN ITS TERM OF OFFICE, WE HAVE
MANAGED IN LESS THAN A YEAR TO SET A NEW COURSE FOR
EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY AND. NEW STANDARDS FOR OUR
CHILDREN'S FUTURE. THAT COURSE WILL NEVER BE REVERSED,
THOSE STANDARDS WILL NEVER BE DOWNGRADED,
THE GREAT THRUST OF OUR REFORMS SO FARHAS BEEN IN
SECONDARY EDUCATION NOT BECAUSE WE REGARD TERTIARY-EDUCATION
AS ANY LESS IMPORTANT, BUT BECAUSE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
SCHOOLING HAVE BEEN THE AREAS OF GREATEST NEED, OF MOST
PRESSING INADEQUACY AND IMPOVERISHMENT, So LET ME
REASSURE YOU FIRST ON THIS POINT: TERTIARY EDUCATION, BOTH
IN UNIVERSITIES AND INSTITUTIONS LIKE YOURS, RANKS AS HIGH
IN OUR PLANS AND AMBITIONS AS EDUCATION OF ANY OTHER KIND,
IT IS FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR PHILOSOPHY THAT THE WHOLE PROCESS
OF EDUCATION SHOULD FORM AN UNBROKEN AND EVOLVING CONTINUUM
OF INSTRUCTION AND CULTIVATION, IN WHICH ALL CHILDREN
INDEED ALL PEOPLE HAVE A FULL AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY TO
PARTICIPATE AT EVERY STAGE,
HAVING SAID THAT, LET ME MAKE ONE OTHER BROAD POINT
ABOUT THIS PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, IT IS FUNDAMENTAL
TO WHAT COLLEGES LIKE YOURS ARE ALL ABOUT, . WE BELIEVE IN WHAT
OUR OPPONENTOSP POLLIINKKEEEN TTTSOO CCAALLLL I'FORRUEEREE DDOOMM OOFF CCHHOOIICCEEI', s ,/ 4 
-4-
THAT FREEDOM, HOWEVER, MEANS SOMETHING QUITE DIFFERENT.
FOR US FROM WHAT IT MEANS FOR THEM., FOR US, FOR THE
AuSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, FREEDOM OF CHOICE MEANS THE
FREEDOM TO CHOOSE. BETWEEN METHODS AND CnIjiRSFS AND
TYPES OF EDUCATION.: IT DOESNOT MEAN A CHOICE BETWEEN
STANDARDS OR DEGREES OF EXCELLENCE BETWEEN A GOOD
EDUCATION OR A BAD ONE, BETWEEN AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR
A POOR ONE. IT IS SOMETIMES SAID OF SOCIALISTS THAT WE
WANT EVERYONE TO HAVE A UNIVERSITY EDUCATION. THAT WOULD
BE AS SENSIBLE AS SUGGESTING THAT EVERY UNIVERSITY STUDENT
SHOULDSTUDY ECONOMICS. THE WHOLE POINT-OF OUR APPROACH
TO ADVANCED EDUCATION IS THAT A PLURALIST SOCIETY DEMANDS
A PLURALIST CONCEPTION OF EDUCATION. IT DEMANDS DIVERSITY.
YOU WILL REMEMBER THE INTELLECTUAL CONCE. IT PREVAILING
IN VICTORIAN ENGLAND AND IT PERSISTED WITH SURPRISING
RESILIENCE UNTIL QUITE RECENTLY THAT THERE WAS SOMETHING
INHERENTLY SUPERIOR' IN AN EDUCATION IN THE HUMANE ARTS, IN
THE CLASSICAL DISCIPLINES AS DISTINCT FROM THE. PHYSICAL
SCIENCES. AGAIN, A FEW YEARS AGO, THERE WAS'A QUITE FATUOUS
AND SNOBBISH ARGUMENT IN THIS COUNTRY ABOUT THE PROPRIETY OF
COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AWARDING DEGREES. I HOPE WE
HAVE; HEARD THE END OF SUCH ARGUMENTS. I HOPE IT WILL NEVER
AGAIN BE SUGGESTED THAT ONE KIND OF SECONDARY SCHOOL IS
SUPERIOR TO ANOTHER, OR THAT A UNIVERSITY EDUCATION IS MORE
DESIRABLE THAN ONE PROVIDED BY A COLLEGE, THE" IMPORTANT
REQUIREMENT IS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE, OF
DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS MUST
APPLY IN WHATEVER INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES. 
I AM INDEBTED ONCE AGAIN TO PROFESSOR KARMELo
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION
WHOSE REPORT I HAVE MENTIONED THIS AFTERNOON, FOR A
QUOTATION FROM HIS FRANK TATE MEMORIAL LECTURE DELIVERED
LAST WEEK AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE, PROFESSOR KARMEL
SAID THIS AND HE WAS SPEAKING OF THE COURSE THAT TERTIARY
EDUCATION SHOULD TAKE
" ONE WILL, GENERALLY SPEAKING, AIM TOWARDS
RODUCING A CONTINUUM OF EDUCATION OPPORTUNI'TIES,
IN DIVERSE INSTITUTIONS, OFFERING DIVERSE COURSES,
USING DIVERSE MODES OF LEARNING; AND NO DOUBT
WE WILL ATTACH DIVERSE' VALUES TO THEM...
ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE ( WILL STILL) BE IMPORTANT
FOR UNIVERSITIES AND FOR COLLEGES AND WILL SEPARATE
THEM FROM OTHER INSTITUTIONS, BUT IT DOESN'T
MEAN THAT THERE WON'T BE OTHER FORMS OF INSTITUTIONS
THAT MIGHT EMPHASISE OTHER THINGS AND MIGHT REGARD
UNIVERSITIES AS MORE BOUND UP WITH LIFE EXPERIENCES
THAN WITH LEARNING IN THE TRADITIONAL SENSE.,"
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION HELP
PROVIDE THIS ESSENTIAL ELEMENT OF DIVERSITY IN OUR EDUCATIONAL
SYSTEM. BUT THEY DO MORE THAN THAT: THEY MAKE THE WHOLE
PROCESS OF ACCESS TO TERTIARY EDUCATION MORE JUST AND EQUITABLE.
IF WE LOOK BACK ON THE LONG YEARS OF RULE BY LIBERAL-COUNTRY
PARTY GOVERNMENTS, NO ONE WILL DISPUTE THAT UNDER OUR
PREDECESSORS MORE AND MORE YOUNG PEOPLE WERE ADMITTED TO
UNIVERSITIES. 
6-
YET IT WAS ONLY IN THE EARLY DAYS OF WIDESPREAD COMMONWEALTH
SCHOLARSHIPS THAT THIS GREATER ACCESS TO TERTIARY EDUCATION
WAS BASED FAIRLY ON CONSIDERATIONS OF ACADEMIC MERIT ALONE,
AS FEES ROSE AND THE SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME CONTRACTED, A
UNIVERSITY EDUCATION DEPENDED MORE AND MORE ON THE ABILITY
TO PAY FOR IT. ISUGGEST THERE IS A SIMPLE WAY TO TEST
WHETHER GENUINE EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY. EXISTS, WE SHOULD
LOOK TO SEE WHETHER THOSE GOING ON TO HIGHER EDUCATION ARE
DRAWN FROM ALL GROUPS OF THE POPULATION IN THE SAME PROPORTION
AS EACH GROUP IS REPRESENTED IN THE POPULATION.
THE KARMEL REPORT HAS CLEARLY SHOWN THAT IN NO COUNTRY
HAS THIS IN FACT HAPPENED. WE ARE NOT ALONE IN THE SOCIALLY
DISCRIMINATING NATURE OF OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM. MANY
AUSTRALIAN STUDIES HAVE ILLUSTRATED THE GENERAL EXPERIENCE.
A TYPICAL SURVEY OF STUDENTS ENTERING FOUR PROFESSIONAL
FACULTIES IN six AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES IN 1965 AND 1967
SHOWED THAT NEARLY HALF THE STUDENTS ENTERING HIGHER EDUCATION
WERE THE CHILDREN OF PROFESSIONAL AND MANAGERIAL FATHERS, WHO
REPPFSENTEI 17.5% OF THE POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP LIKELY TO
BE FATHERS. INDUSTRIAL WORKERS REPRESENTED NEARLY 60% OF THE
POPULATION, BUT THEIR CHILDREN ACCOUNTED FOR ONLY 22.6% OF
STUDENTS ENTERING THE FOUR FACULTIES. A STUDY OF STUDENTS
ENTERING SCIENCE COURSES AT UNIVERSITIES AND DIPLOMA COURSES
IN APPLIED SCIENCES AT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN
AUSTRALIA IN 1969 SHOWED THAT 64% HAD FATHERS IN4 PROFESSIONAL,
MANAGERIAL OR FARM-OWNING OCCUPATIONS, ALTHOUGH THIS CATEGORY
ACCOUNTED FOR 25% OF THE MALE POPULATION; 20.2% OF THE STUDENTS
HAD FATHERS IN MANUAL OCCUPATIONS, ALTHOUGH SUCH WORKERS
ACCOUNTED FOR 59% OF THE MALE POPULATION. o o m 1 
7
PROFESSOR KARMEL' S COMMITTEE CONCLUDED: " AMONG TERTIARY
STUDENTS OF ALL KINDS, THE CHILDREN OF MANUAL W4ORKERS
ARE UNDER-REPRESENTED AND THOSE OF HIGHER STATUS FAMILIES
OVER-REPRESENTED, TO THE EXTENT THAT HIGHER EDUCATION
IS FINANCED FROM TAXES IT HAS, THUS A SOMEWHAT REGRESSIVE
EFFECT, POORER PEOPLE CONTRIBUTING TO THE COST OF EDUCATION
OF A GROUP IN WHICH THE CHILDREN OF RICHER PARENTS PREDOMINATE
AND FROM WHICH RECIPIENTS CAN EXPECT TO DRAW HIGHER THAN
AVERAGE INCOMES. IDON'T WANT IT TO BE THOUGHT FOR A MINUTE THAT WE
SEE COLLEGES AS THE PRIME RECEPTACLES FOR POORER OR LESS
AMBITIOUS STUDENTS, WHILE UNIVERSITIES CONTINUE TO CATER
FOR THE WEL. L-TO-DO. OUR PURPOSE IS TO SEE THAT ALL
INSTITUTIONS OF ADVANCED EDUCATION ARE OPEN TO THE WIDEST
RANGE OF PEOPLE. TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN WHATEVER FORM,
MUST BE AS ACCESSIBLE, AS INTEGRAL A. PART OF THE RANGE OF
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION AS EDUCATION OF ANY OTHER KIND. THIS
IS WHERE GOVERNMENTS IN THE PAST HAVE FAILED. No ONE WOULD
DENY THAT THE UNIVERSITIES HAVE VASTLY IMPROVED IN QUALITY
AND QUANTITY SINCE THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM. YET IN 1971 UNIVERSITIES REFUSED
ADMISSION To 131 PER CENT OF THE QUALIFIED APPLICANTS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES, 20 PER CENT OF THE APPLICANTS IN VICTORIA
AND 11 PER CENT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, EIGHTY-SIX UNIVERSITY
DEPARTMENTS WERE OBLIGED TO IMPOSE ENTRY QUOTAS. ONLY ONE
STUDENT IN EVERY THREE AT UNIVERSITIES AND ONE STUDENT IN
EVERY 10 AT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION HAS RECEIVED
ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. i / 8 
-8-
THE MAJORITY OF PLACES AT TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS HAVE BEEN
OCCUPIED NOT BY THE STUDENTS BEST EQUIPPED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THEM, BUT BY THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD THE FEES.
As YOU KNOW, FROM NEXT JANUARY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL ASSUME FULL RESPONSIBILI* TY FOR THE FUNDING OF AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES. I DO NOT NEED TO EMPHASISE THE IMPORTANCE OF
THIS STEP FOR INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS THIS, OR IF I MAY SAY SO
FOR THE FUTURE OF COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS,
OUR FIRST ACT WILL BE TO ABOLISH ALL. FEES. To DO SO WILL. COST
US $ 33 MILLION FOR THE FIRST SIX MONTHS OF 1973-74 A SMALL
PROPORTION OF THE INCOME UNIVERSITIES RECEIVE, BUT A LARGE
PROPORTION OF THE INCOME OF STUDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES.
ACCESS TO UNIVERSITY EDUCATION WILL BE ON THE BASIS OF
MERIT RATHER THAN MONEY.
AT THE SAME TIME, MY COLLEAGUE THE MINISTER FOR
EDUCATION, HAS ANNOUNCED A COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAM OF LIVING
ALLOWANCES AND OTHER BENEFITS FOR STUDENTS ENROLLED IN
APPROVED COURSES. THESE MEASURES WILL DO A GREAT DEAL MORE
TO MAKE HIGHER EDUCATION GENUINELY FREE THAN SIMPLY REPLACE
THE EXISTING COMPETITLYF_ SCHOLARSHIP SCHEMES. IN TASMANIA
THIS YEAR LESS THAN 20% OF STUDENTS IN ADVANCED EDUCATION
ARE RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER PROGRAMS INITIATED BY TIHE
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT. NEXT YEAR, ALL AUSTRALIAN STUDENTS
WILL BE ABLE TO APPLY FOR ASSISTANCE ON THE BASIS OF NEED. ,/ 9 
-9-
LET ME MENTION SOME OF OUR OTHER MEASURES TO IMPROVE
THE STANDARDS OF HIGHER EDUCATION OTHER THAN IN UNIVERSITIES,
ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTS IN JANUARY THIS YEAR WAS TO SET UP
A COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THAT COMMITTEE
IS DUE TO REPORT IN THE FIRST HALF OF NEXT YEAR, I HOPE IT
WILL BRING AS MUCH FRESH AIR TO THE STUDY OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
AS THE SCHOOLS COMMITTEE HAS BROUGHT TO SECONDARY EDUCATION,
IT WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF OVERALL MANPOWER POLICY AND THE NEEDS
OF INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT AND COMMERCE, ANOTHER OF OUR EARLY
INITIATIVES THIS YEAR WAS TO GRANT AN ADDITIONAL $ 5 MILLION
FOR LIBRARY MATERIALS IN ALL COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
DURING THE 1973-75 TRIENNIUM, TASMANIA'S SHARE OF THIS WILL
BE $ 135,000, NEXT, WE HAVE APPOINTED A COMMITTEE OF THE AUSTRALIAN
UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION TO ADVISE ON AN OPEN UNIVERSITY,
ONCE AGAIN I ACKNOWLEDGE THE ASSISTANCE OF PROFESSOR KARMEL,
WHO WILL BE THE CHAIRMAN OF THAT INQUIRY, WE HAVE ASKED THE
COMMITTEE TO SEE HOW AUSTRALIA CAN BEST EXPAND THE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR EXTRA-MURAL DEGREE COURSES OF UNIVERSITY STANDARD AND
RAISE GENERAL EDUCATIONAL LEVELS IN THE COMMUNITY,
FINALLY, WE HAVE DECIDED TO TACKLE THE REALITIES OF COST
ESCALATION IN FINANCING TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN TAKING OVER THE
FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS OF THE STATES, THE GOVERNMENT WILL, FROM
THE BEGINNING OF NEXT YEAR, PROVIDE FOR ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROVED
PROGRAMS OF EXPENDITURE, THIS WILL TAKE INTO ACCOUNT COST
VARIATIONS IN BOTH CAPITAL AND RECURRENT EXPENDITURE WHICH WERE
NOT ALLOWED WHEN THE PROGRAMS WERE ORIGINALLY ADOPTED, 
10
THIS WILL BE ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT IN TIMES OF RAPIDLY RISING
COSTS. IMIGHT MENTION HERE THAT I AM AWARE OF YOUR OWN PRESENT
DIFFICULTIES WITH RECURRENT FUNDS. MR. REECE WROTE TO ME A
FEW DAYS AGO ABOUT THIS PROBLEM. kE HAS SENT A DETAILED
STATEMENT TO THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED EDUCATION TO SUPPORT
HIS REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDS. IASSURE YOU THAT MR. BEAZLEY
WILL BE LOOKING CLOSELY AND SYMPATHETICALLY AT YOUR NEEDS.
IBELIEVE I CAN CLAIM THAT WITHIN A YEAR OF TAKING OFFICE
THE NEW AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TRANSFORMED THE PROSPECTS
FOR EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY. ACROSS THE WHOLE FIELD OF
LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION PRE-SCHOOLS, PRIMARY SCHOOLS,
SECONDARY SCHOOLS, TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, UNIVERSITIES
AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION WE HAVE ACTED WITH SPEED
AND DETERMINATION TO RAISE STANDARDS AND INCREASE OPPORTUNITIES.
A LONG ERA OF NEGLECT AND IMPVERISHMENT IS AT AN END; BARRIERS
OF PRIVILEGE AND INEQUALITY ARE BEING STEADILY REMOVED. YOU KNOW
OF THE ATTEMPTS BY OUR OPPONENTS TO USE THEIR POWER IN THE SENATE
TO FRUSTRATE AND DEL. AY THIS PROCESS. THEY HAVEN'T THE COURAGE
TO BLOCK OUR REFORMS OUTRIGHT. THEY PREFER TO HINDER US BY
NIT-PICKING AND STEALTH. ITELL YOU THEY WILL NOT SUCCEED.
THEY WILL NOT SUCCEED BECAUSE THEY KNOW, AS WE KNOW, THAT THE NEW
DEAL IN EDUCATION, THE NEW VISTA OF OPPORTUNITY WE ARE OFFERING
To AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN TO ALL CHILDREN, WHATEVER THE BACKGROUNDS,
THEIR INCOMES, THEIR ENVIRONMENT HAS THE WHOLEHEARTED SUPPORTAND
ENDORSEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. IAPPLAUD THE WORK OF
THIS FINE COLLEGE AND OTHERS LIKE IT. YOU ARE AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF OUR PLANS TO RAISE THE EDUCATIONAL HORIZONS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR, EG. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO OPEN THE AUSTRALIAN HOUSING STANDARDS CONFERENCE,
LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTELL, CANBERRA,
MONDAY 19 NOVEMBER, 10973
THOSE ACQUAINTED WITH MY PERSONAL FOIBLES WILL
KNOW HOW CLOSE TO MY HEART THE SUBJECT OF YOUR CONFERENCE
HAS ALWAYS BEEN. IN THE MORE MUNDANE MATTERS OF
STATESMANSHIP THERE WERE TWO PARTICULAR HOBBY-HORSES
THAT I RODE WITH GREAT ENERGY DURING MY YEARS IN
OPPOSITION. ONE WAS SEWERAGE; THE OTHER WAS UNIFORM
HOUSING STANDARDS. I REGRET TO SAY THAT MANY PEOPLE MADE
LIGHT OF THESE MATTERS. YET BOTH OF THEM WERE CRUCIAL,
IN THEIR DIF17[ 1RFNT WAYS, TO THE BASIC LIVING STANDARDS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS STILL
HAMPERED BY A BEWILDERING VARIETY OF LEGAL CODES AND
STANDARDS. IAM THEREFORE DELIGHTED THAT YOU HAVE ASKED
ME TO OPEN THIS IMPORTANT CONFERENCE.$ TRUST THAT, IN
A SINGULAR AND PERHAPS UNSPECTACULAR WAY, IT WILL PROVE
TO BE ONE OF THE MOST FRUITFUL AND REWARDING INITIATIVES
my GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN$ i / 2 
2
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NOT ALONE IN ITS
PERCEPTION OF THE FOLLIES AND DANGERS OF CONFLICTING
STANDARDS AND OUTMODED PRACTICES IN ALL PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY AND ALL AREAS OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY.
THE STATES HAVE COME GRADUALLY TO RECOGNISE THIS STATE
OF AFFAIRS. THE STERLING WORK THAT HAS RESULTED IN THE
AUSTRALIAN MODEL UNIFORM BUILDING CODE IS PROOF OF THIS,
AND I HOPE THAT CODE WILL SOON BE ADOPTED BY ALL STATES.
A FURTHER PROOF IS THE PRESENCE HERE TODAY OF THE MOST
REPRESENTATIVE GROUP OF PEOPLE IN THE HOUSING INDUSTRY
EVER GATHERED IN AUSTRALIA BUILDERS, ARCHITECTS,
PLANNERS, MATERIALS SUPPLIERS, UNIONISTS, ADMINISTRATORS,
ENGINEERS, SURVEYORS, CONTRACTORS, INSTITUTIONAL LENDERS
AND BUILDING CONTROLLERS. YOUR COLLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE AND
EXPERIENCE OF THE HOME BUILDING INDUSTRY IS UNRIVALLED.
THERE HAVE BEEN HOUSING SEMINARS AND FORUMS BEFORE,
BUT THIS CONFERENCE IS UNIQUE. YOU ARE NOT HERE SIMPLY TO
EXCHANGE VIEWS AND INFORMATION. YOU HAVE A VERY PRACTICAL
TASK BEFORE YOU. I HOPE THIS CONFERENCE WILL SUPERVISE
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW STANDARDS FOR HOUSING BASED ON
ORIGINAL RESEARCH; THAT . IT WILL DEVELOP MODERN, READILY
UNDERSTOOD NATIONAL HOME BUILDING REGULATIONS WHICH CAN BE
APPLIED AND ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES.
THAT IS YOUR CHALLENGE. 
-3-
I AM HEARTENED BY THE PRESENCE HERE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT, BECAUSE IT IS THE HOUSING
DEPARTMENTS IN THE STATES AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES WHOSE FULL CO-OPERATION IS NEEDED. WE MUST
ENSURE THAT ANY NEW HOME BUILDING CODE IS A NATIONAL ONE,
A UNIVERSAL ONE, SO THAT INDUSTRY CAN OPERATE WITH THE
GREATEST EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMY, AND ORDINARY HOME BUYERS
CAN BENEFIT FROM REDUCTIONS' IN COST.
I HAVE REFERRED MANY TIMES TO THE NEED TO REDUCE
HOME BUILDING COSTS, BUT THE UNPALATABLE FACT IS THAT LATELY
WE HAVE SEEN INORDINATE INCREASES RATHER THAN REDUCTIONS.
PERHAPS THAT IS DUE TO OUR HIGH STANDARD OF LIVING AND
ADVANCING EXPECTATIONS. 14E ARE NEVER LIKELY TO SEE CHEAP
LABOUR AND CUT-THROAT COMPETITION AGAIN. WITH THE ADVENT
OF RELATIVELY FULL, AND I HOPE STABLE, EMPLOYMENT, AND THE
ADVANCE OF EDUCATION, THERE WILL BE A PROGRESSIVELY
DECLINING SUPPLY OF ON-SITE LABOUR, OF SEMI-SKILLED MEN
FOR BRICKYARDS AND TIMBER MILLS, ! IE MUST EXPECT A MORE
MECHANIZED ERA IN BUILDING LESS ON-SITE WORK AND MORE
FACTORY WORK IN WHICH GREATER UNIFORMITY AND
RATIONALISATION OF PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES WILL HELP
REDUCE COSTS. I AM TOLD THAT EVERY ONE PER CENT SAVING ( F
COSTS IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS WORTH AT LEAST
MILLION A YEAR. / 4 
I DO NOT HAVE TO TELL BUILDERS AND SUPPLIERS
HOW DIFFERING REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS ADD SIGNIFICANTLY
TO THEIR COSTS. THEY KNOW THIS. IT IS A SUBJECT THAT
YOUR CONFERENCE WILL EXPLORE. IT IS SUFFICIENT FOR ME TO
EMPHASISE THAT SUBSTANTIAL ECONOMIES IN HOME BUILDING CAN
BE ACHIEVED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE AT OUR COMMAND. THE
BENEFITS WILL BE FELT IN THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE QUALITY OF
LIFE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE, AND NOT LEAST
FOR THOSE WITH PARTICULAR NEEDS THE ELDERLY, THE DISABLED,
ABORIGINESAND PEOPLE LIVING IN AREAS OF CLIMATIC EXTREMES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORTS
THE OBJECTIVES OF THIS CONFERENCE. WE HAVE TAKEN THE
INITIATIVE BY ESTABLISHING AN EXPERT TECHNICAL TASK FORCE.
THIS TASK FORCE WILL INCLUDE ARCHITECTS, ENGINEERS,
QUANTITY SURVEYORS AND SOCIOLOGISTS, SUPPORTED BY TECHNICAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS OF THE NEW COMBINED DEPARTMENT
OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION.
THE MAIN OBJECTIVE OF THE TASK FORCE WILL BE TO
PREPARE A NUMBER OF GENERALLY ACCEPTABLE-MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
FOR HOME BUILDING IN AUSTRALIA, EXPRESSED AS CLEARLY AND
SIMPLY AS POSSIBLE. LET ME EMPHASISE THAT UNIFORM HOUSING
STANDARDS NEED NOT MEAN UNIFORMITY IN STYLES. EACH AUSTRALIAN
CITY HAS A DISTINCTIVE ARCHITECTURE, AND IT IS CENTRAL TO OUR
PLANS FOR NEW AUSTRALIAN CITIES THAT AUSTRALIANS SHOULD HAVE
AN AUTHENTIC CHOICE OF LOCATIONS AND STYLES. 
THE FORMULATION OF SUCH NATIONAL STANDARDS WILL INVOLVE
CLOSE CONSULTATION WITH THE STATES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS
DIRECTLY CONCERNED. WE ARE LOOKING FOR CONSENSUS: WE
ARE NOT SEEKING TO ACCEPT A LOWEST AGREED DENOMINATOR.
WHERE NECESSARY, THE EXPERTS WILL UNDERTAKE FRESH RESEARCH
SO THAT DECISIONS CAN BE BASED ON SCIENTIFIC FINDINGS.
THE GOVERNMENT INTENDS THAT THE TASK FORCE WILL
PREPARE A SERIES OF SUPPLEMENTARY PUBLICATIONS AFTER
STUDYING CLIMATIC DIFFERENCES, DESIGN AND SITING,
SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS AND FITMENTS WITHIN DWELLINGS.
THIS CONFERENMF AND ITS EXPERT COMMITTEESWILL PROVIDE
THE GUIDELINES THAT THE TASK FORCE WILL FOLLOW.
AT THE SAME TIME THE HOUSING INDUSTRY WILL BE ABLE TO
REVISE ITS THINKING IN OTHER DIRECTIONS, ESPECIALLY
IN ADOPTING NEW METRIC SIZES. AND REMEMBER ALWAYS THAT
HOUSING STANDARDS ARE NOT NEEDED MERELY TO ENSURE THAT
ONE COMPONENT FITS ANOTHER, BUT THAT MINIMUM STANDARDS
AND QUALITIES PREVAIL.
THE AIJSRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AN IMPORTANT
RESPONSIBILITY IN BOTH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE HOUSING, WE HAVE
DIRECT RESPONSIBILITY FOR GOVERNMENT HOUSING IN THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY A~ D THC NOSYHERN TERRITORY. IF, HOWEVER,
WE CAN REDUCE THE COST OF HOUsING IN THE STATES BY RESEARCH,
BY DEVELOPMENT AND BY UNIFYING HOME BUILDING REGULATIONS, THE
TAXPAYER'S HOUSING DOLLAR CAN BE MADE TO GO FURTHER IN EACH
STATE'S WELFARE HOUSING PROGRAMS, / 6 
-6
TO TAKE ONE PRACTICAL EXAMPLE, THERE IS CLEARLY
A NEED FOR UNIFORM HOUSING STANDARDS IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF ALBIJRY-WODONGA. IMAGINE THE DIFFICULTIES CREATED
AND HIGH COSTS INCURRED IF THE DIFFERENCES IN REGULATORY
REQUIREMENTS WHICH NOW EXIST ON OPPOSITE SIDES OF THE
MURRAY ARE ALLOWED TO CONTINUE. THIS IS TRUE FOR OTHER
POPULATION CENTRES NEAR STATE BORDERS. WE WANT TO ENSURE
THAT A COMPANY PRODUCING COMPONENTS OR FITTINGS IN ToowooMBA
CAN HAVE A NATION-WIDE MARKET AND SELL ITS PRODUCTS IN
PERTH AND LAUNCESTON.
A NATIONAL CONFERENCE SUCH AS THIS CAN TAKE
INITIATIVES TO SECURE TI* IS. WITH CO-OPERATIVE EFFORT
AMONG PEOPLE OF MANY DISCIPLINES, GREAT ABILITIES AND
MUCH EXPERIENCE, I AM SURE THIS CONFERENCE CAN MAKE REAL
PROGRESS IN OVERCOMING THE URGENT PROBLEMS FACING THE HOME
BUIL. DING INDUSTRY. I WISH YOU SUCCESS. IT GIVES ME
GREAT PLEASURE TO DECLARE THIS INAUGURAL MEETING OF THE
AUSTRALIAN HOUSING STANDARDS CONFERENCE OPEN. 



, LW51AR(; U: 8.-W P: 4 THURSDAY 122 : 7ov 7 3
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, TO THE
LABOR COUNCIL OF N. S. W. TRADES HALL, SYDNEY THURSDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1973.
PRICES AND INCOMES
I welcome this opportunity to address the Labor Council
of N. S. W. on the forthcoming referendums on prices and incomes.
Your council is the largest State trade union organisation in
Australia. Clearly the attitude of the one million members of
the 110 unions affiliated with this council will play an important
part in determining the success of the referendums.
I believe it is undeniably in the interests of these
people and all of the wage and salary earners of N. S. W. that
the referendums do succeed. For what we are seeking the power
for the Australian Parliament to make laws about prices and about
incomes will enhance our abil. ity to try to ensure that the
prosperity of our nation is a reality for all our people, and not
just an illusion. Such a power will not be a cure-all but it will
add significantly to the armoury of economic weapons which we can
deploy) particularly in the fight against inflation.
No section of the community can be more aware of the
effects of inflation than the trade union movement. No section of
the community is more constantly engaged in trying to achieve a
real improvement in living standards in the face of inflation than
the trade unions. With one possible exception, it is their members
who suffer most from rising prices. That exception would probably
be pensioners and other people on low fixed incomes and the
trade union movement has always shown a vigorous concern about any
erosion of the value of their benefits and savings. / 2 
The Government has demonstrated beyond doubt its
determination to deal with the problem of inflation. Not that we
concede for a minute that the overall economic picture should be
regarded gloomily. This year we have lifted our national growth
rate to) a near record of We are enjoyingj conditions of
buoyant business prosperity. We are intent on keeping things
that way. Nevcrtheless we rus~, t recognise, and we have recognised,
that Australia, in common with the rest of the world, is undergoing
a period of hiqh inflation. Rising prices must obviously diminish
to an extent the benefits of any general prosperity, particularly
for wage and salary earners. Already we have acted by introducing
a series of carefully timed and related anti-inflationary measures.
We have established the Prices justification Tribunal. We have
cut tariffs. We have revalued the dollar twice. And other fiscal
and monetary action has been takcn when needed.
I would mention in this context our decision this we]'
to cut tariffs on television sets and other electronic equipment.
Primarily this has been done to ensure that ~ Australians do no-' L
have to pay excessive prices for colour television sets. We are
sure that Australians will be able to benefit from this decision
without any drop in the level of employment in the industry. / 3 
-3-
one measure we have not been prepared to take to counter
inflation is to create unemployment. We are not prepared to see
a return to the situation in 1972 when economic action taken by
the previous government resulted in 130,000 people being out of
work. We repudiate firmly and unchangeably such an antiquated
and harmiful approach to dealing with inflation. Indeed, within
months of coming into office, the Labor Government has reduced
unemployment as nearly as possible to acceptable limits.
I have already mentioned however, that, despite the
action we have taken to try to counter rising prices, the Australian
Government is denied a full complement of economic powers to deal
with this problem. The power to make laws about. prices and
incomes resides with the States. They have been unwilling or
unable to use effectively their power to contain prices. This
applies particularly in Victoria and Queensland, all of
which are dominated by non-labor governments. The Australian
Government has asked the States to refer their powers to it so that
national action can be taken but the three largest States have
refused co-operation.
It -is against this background that we are now taking
this question to the people in the referendums to be held on
8 December. This approach is based on the firm conviction that
inflation is a national problem which demands national answers.
All comparable countries have the powers that we are seeking.
We are asking the people to give us nothing more and nothing less
than the economic authority which the governments of these countries
command. / 4 
The trade union movement is, of course, solidly behind
us in seeking the prices power. It knows that this power wijll
provide the chance for hard-won wage and salary gains to catch
tip on price increases. It knows that it will give the elected
government the opportunity to protect the incomes and savings of
pensioners and fixed income earners. It knows that it will give
homebuyers the prospect of stabilised * costs for land and materials.
The Government does not intend to rigidly apply wideranging
price control. It will make flexibl. e and selective use
of the powers which it is seeking. However, it should have the
ability to prevent, where necessary, excessive rises in the price
of essential commodities. I am confident that with the continued
support of the trade unions and other sections of the community,
that we will be given this ability on 8 December.
T'he union movement however, is not solidl. y supporting us
in seeking the power to make laws about incomes. I know that the
fear of a number of officials is that this power might be used to
introduce a freeze on wages. I have said before, and unequivocally
I will say again, that the Australian Government has no intention
of taking such drastic action. You have more than just my pledg~ e
on that; a freeze on wages and salaries would be contrary to
the statement in the A. L. P. Platform that " good industrial relations
will be best achieved by agreement initially arrived at between
trade unions and employers." I also believe that even our opponents,
if ' they were returned to office, would be forced to recoil from such
a free2ze because of its arbitrary and heavy-handed nature. The
disruption and disharmony that this type of action would cause,
would. I believe, deter them. 
Despite this, we are all aware that the Australian
Council of Trade Unions has called upon affiliated bodies to
campaign against the incomes power. The ACTU Executive on
October decided that this proposal. is " beyond ACTU policy".
I am not suggesting that too much significance be read into the
use of the world " beyond"; but it is interesting that the
Executive did not say that the proposal is " against ACTU policy".
The substantial ground of objection by the Executive
is that " the A. C. T. U. will under no circumstances accept a wage
freeze and will actively campaign against any proposal to
implement a wage freeze in this country." I have already pointed
out that the incomes power and a wages freeze are definitely not
the same thing. You have the undertaking of the Government and
the Australian Labor Party that there will be no freeze; and you
can make the realistic assessment that any blustering inclination
towards it by our opponents would disappear if they had the chance
to consider such a move.
I do not believe that the incomes power is against the
interests of trade unions. Indeed, I would point out to you that
the ACTU Congress the supreme policy-making body of the
organisation as recently as 4 September carried without dissent
as part of its economic policy for the ensuing two years a demand
that " direct regulation over non-wage forms of incomes as a means
of ureve nting excessive increases in these incomes" be introduced. 
-6-
There is no way that any national Government could act
on this demand without the incomes power which we are seeking.
It would be a legislative nightmare although perhaps ultimately
a lawyer's delight in the courts for us to frame and seek a more
restricted power. How would we define non-wage incomes for the
purpose of an amendment to the Constitution? I do not believe
that we could achieve the necessary precision of definition. I
believe that the public would be so confused by any attempt to do
so that, in keeping with the result of so many referendums in the
past, people would play safe and reject a proposal of this kind
in favour of the status-quo.
In making my opening broadcast on the referendums on
national television on Tuesday night, I said that, if powers over
prices and incomes are to be effective, they must be uniform,
immediate and unchallengeable in their application. Even if we
were to attempt to succeed in an attempt to acquire a limited
power over incomes, that power could not be either immediate or
unchallengeable in its application.
So we are left with the proposition that, for the national
government to do anything about non-wage incomes, it must be given
the power that we are seeking now. In keeping with our attitude
towards price control, we would only apply our authority over
incomes flexibly and selectively. Even then, it would be a mistake
to regard this as a purely negative power. It would, for example,
enable us to ensure the eventual attainment of equal pay for all
women in the workforce. It would also permit the Australian
Parliament to make allowances for inflation, if necessary, by making
periodic adjustments to wages and salaries, as it is already making
periodic adjustments to pensions. 
-7-
On this last point I was amused recently when my attention
was drawn to a statement made by Mr Snedden, when he was Treasurer,
in an interview published in the " National Times" in February 1972.
He was asked about his attitude towards quarterly costs-of-living
adjustments to wages. And he said: " It's curious if you go back
to I think it was ' 53 when the adjustments were suspended, they
were doning damage at that time in a different environment. The
curious inversion now is that if you had quarterly adjustments you
would reduce the wage increase." The changing attitudes of
Mr Snedden become curiouser and curiouser! The only effective way
that he could pursue such a policy would be for the Australian
Parliament to have the power to make laws about incomes.
Aside fromL Mr Snedden's vagaries, a strong economic
argument can be made for the introduction of regular cost-of-living
adjustments to wages and salaries. The argument rests on the view
that some wage and salary demands are forced very high by the
fear that more moderate pay increases will be rendered inadequate
by rising prices. The Australian Government at present does not have
the power to introduce cost-of-living adjustments to counter this
problem. It is unable to do more than ask the Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission to do Clearl,, it would be a qreat
advaintagje to unionist!: to Le able tr; cnter , waye and salary negotiation
or award hearings with the knowledge that the Government could, if
necessary, subsequently adjust upwards any new wages or salaries
achieved through these processes, if their value was eroded by rising
prices. / 8 
I also ask you to consider the use to which income
powers have been put by the State Government in NJ. S. W. To m~ y knowledge,
no N. S. W. Government of any political complexion has used its
legislative authority to decrease or freeze wages or salaries.
In fact, any legislative action has always resulted in an improvement.
The only action to diminish pay has always been taken by the
Industrial Commission.
The general reduction in wages in N. S. W. during the
Depression was made by the Commission, for example. Then we can
look at what has happened to cost-of-living adjustments in this
State. In 1953 the Commnission followed a Commonwealth court
decision to abolish these adjustments to the bas-ic wage. Otate
legislation in 1955 reouired the restoration of the adjustments.
This legislation was abandoned in 1964 but the State basic wage was
increase sign~ ific antly by the Parliament to equate it with the
Federal basic wage. Finally, we can examine the history of the
movement towards equal pay for women. A State Industrial Corriissicn
decision failed to adopt completely a 1950 Commonwealth court
dlecision to increase the basic wage of one pound a week arid to lift
the female basic wage from 54 per cent t'-o 75 per cent of the vale
rate. Legislative action in the N. S. W. Parliament in 1956 redressed
this decision and introduced a program for the attainment of equal
pay. In short, legislative action based on. the State's incomes
power, even if it has not been used to a great extent, has been in
favour of employees for 40 years. This means that no party in office
has been prepared to use that power to reduce workers' pay. I argue
that this provides a positive indication that no party in control 9 
-9-
of the national Parliament would use an incomes power to reduce
or freeze wages and salaries.
The Australian Labor Party has gone further than giving
an unequivocal commitment on this point. Our Federal Executive
declared in October that the implementation of prices and incomes
powers " can only he successful with the direct involvement of the
trade union ntovemcnt in the formulation and aOnministration of any
policies affecting trade unionists." All overseas experience hWE
proved that policies on incomes cannot work without a broadly-based
community consensus and the co-operation of the bulk of the trade
union movement. Lny failure to achieve this cornsensus anC this
co-operation has inevitably led t~ o a failure of such pol icies
overseas. Thus there can be no question of coercing the bull of
the union movement or of the business world as we would need their
support to make any action on incomes effective. However, the
powers we seek would prevent any small recalcitrant minority from
imposing its will contrary to the consensus of the community.
My final point is that division within the labor movement,
often based on short-term considerations, has usually resulted
in the defeat of constitutional amendments put to the people by
rcferendum. Members of the labor movcment have come to regret
these earlier failures in subsequent generations. On this occasion
I hope that we can learn from our history and minimise any
disputation which might result from doubts or fears. 



EMBARGO: 6.3OPM FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1973
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE FIRST BIENNALE OF SYDNEY, SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE,
FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 1973
At last I find myself at an opening ceremony at the
Sydney Opera House where I'm not left out in the cold. I hope
no one will accuse me of stealing the limelight from Sir Robert
Askin. He manages these affairs more lavishly than the Transfield
organisation. After all, he provided a fireworks display and a
Royal tour for his opening ceremony. This ceremony, I hope, will
be just as memorable, for there could be no more fitting place to
stage this exhibition. than here in this building. The proudest
possession of the city in which it stands, It is a measure of
the fame that the Opera House has won for Sydney and for Australia,
of the central place it holds in the hearts and imaginations of
the people of this city, of its relevance to our whole artistic
and cultural life, that it should be the natural location for
the most important exhibition of visual arts ever assembled in
this country. I hope that will not be taken as an overstatement. I can
think of no display of contemporary art in Australia more diverse
in its origins, richer in what it offers, or richer in what it
promises. Here are representative works from 36 leading artists
in 14 nations. There can be no doubt that the Biennale of Sydney,
like those of Venice, Paris, Sao Paulo, Tokyo and Mlexico City,
will take its place among the leading art shows in the world.
It can be said today that the Opera House is no longer a local
institution. We stand now on international ground. We are hosts
to the artists of the world, and this f-rst international exhibition
of art may be seen as the most characteristic and fitting event of
the opening season.
I welcome those who have come as ambassadors to exhibit here
with Australian artists. They are doubly welcome: for the
interest and pleasure they and their works will bring us, and for
showing by their presence that Australia has joined a community
of the highest importance and with the most admirable of aims
the increase of excellence in the practice of the arts, and
their widened appreciation and enjoyment by all communities.
This may not be the occasion to strike too nationalistic
a note, let alone boast about the achievements of my own Government.
Nevertheless, I think there are two points I should stress. One
is that Australia is by no means without distinction in the fields
of international art. Our artists are widely known and admired,
and I recall my pleasure a few weeks ago when I heard of
John Armstrong's important prize at the Biennale in Sao Paulo.
The significance of exhibitions such as this is that the work of our
own artists may be seen with that of equally eminent artists from
overseas. The community of spirit, the humanity common to all
artistic creation, may be felt and shared directly. The result must
be to enrich our own artistic experience and stimulate the energies
and perceptions of artists themselves. ./ 2 
2
My second point concerns the responsibility of the
Governments to the arts. I suppose nobody will contradict
me if I remark that neither Opera houses nor large works of art
come cheaply these days. The Australian Government has tried to
ensure that the funds available will produce the maximum benefit
to the cultural life of the country. Nothing could be more
welcome in achieving this object than to have the active aid
of industry and commerce: not only at the level of this
impressive event, but in smaller yet immensely valuable ways.
Governents, however, have a deep and continuing
responsibility. Elsewhere today I announced two notable
decisions by the Australian Government. I have approved a grant
of $ 20,000 to the Art Gallery ofNew South Wales to help clear its
outstanding debt of $ 75,000 on the purchase of the self-portrait
by Pierre Bonnard. This grant is conditional on the Government
of NSW providing the balance. In addition, I announced grants
to Australian artists totalling $ 258,000, which we have approved
on the recommendation of the Visual Arts Board of the Australian
Council for the Arts. In the same way, my Government, through
the Australian Council for the Arts, Is happy to be a minor
partner in financing this event in collaboration with the
Transfield organisation.
The works here are in every sense contemporary ones.
I noticed in the catalogue a painting by David Aspden called
" Some Other Blues". That struck a chord with me. Indeed to my
untutored eye it bore some fleeting resemblance to our celebrated
acquisition for the National Gallery. I know how distressing it
must have been for many of you to see that purchase greeted in some
quarters with derision and incomprehension. Quite ignorant comments
were made by people who ought to know better. Do notthink for a
moment that I put myself -forward as an authority in these matters.
I merely say this: In " Blue Poles" we acquired an acknowledged
masterpiece, and I am proud that we bought it. Generations of
future Australians will thank Mr. Mollison and the National
Gallery for what they have done. The point is that there remains
an invincible element of philistinism in all societies, including
our own, that exhibitions like this will help to break down.
The fast that none of these works are judged, and that no prizes
are awarded, reflects the fect that in the hih4y experimental
world of modern art comparisons between individual iorks are
diffLcuit. Thoere Piyst a3wbys be a place in art for whal. is
challenging, pñ uvocative, unconventional even baffling.
Indeed it may be said that these have been the essential
qualities of all true art for all time.
This Biennale is a community event. Just as one hopes that
the Opera House itself will draw its audiences from the widest
possible community, I like to think that events such as this will
multiply and involve people of all ages and interests. This will
happen, not because the Government becomes an ever more generous
patron of the arts, but because the example of Mr. Belgiorno-Nettis
and Mr. Salteri will be followed by others inside and outside the
commercial world. I commend their efforts unreservedly. Theyand
the Transf ield organisation are to be congratulated on bringing
this event the first, I hope, of many to the Australian people. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, M. P,
TO OPEN THE INAUGURAL MEETING OF
THE NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL,
CANBERRA, P0; 4DAY 26 N0VEMBER 1973
THIS MEETING HAS ASSEMBLED TO GIVE PRACTICAL
EXPRESSION TO OUR HOPES WHATEVER GOVERNMENT WE REPRESENT,
WHATEVER PARTY WE REPRESENT THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
NORTHERN REGIONS OF AUSTRALIA WILL GO FORWARD WITH SPEED,
WITH CERTAINTY, AND WITH GREAT BENEFITS FOR THE PEOPLE
OF THE NORTH AND ALL AUSTRALIANS.
THIS IS BY NO MEANS THE FIRST MEETING THIS YEAR
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND CERTAIN STATE
GOVFRNMENTS 10 EXAMINE ISSUES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO
PARTICULAR REGIONS. THERE HAVE BEEN TALKS BETWEEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE VICTORIAN AND EW SOUTH
WALES GOVERNMENTS CONCERNING ALBURY-WODONGA, AND WITH
THE VICTORIAN, NEW SOUTH WALES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS CONCERNING THE MURRAY WATERAGREEMENT.
THOSE MEETINGS REACHED HIGHLY SATISFACTORY CONCLUSIONS.
I HAVE HIGH HOPES THAT THIS MEETING WILL DO LIKEWISE. ,/ 2 
-2
IT MAY BE THAT SMALLER CONFERENCES SUCH AS THISMORE
INTIMATE, MORE MANAGEABLE, MORE PURPOSEFUL
PERHAPS CAN PRODUCE QUICKER AND MORE SATISFACTORY
RESULTS THAN FULL-SCALE PREMIERS' CONFERENCES. IN
ANY CASE, I WELCOME MR. BJELKE-P-ETERSEN AND
fIR. 3IKRO. I AM GRATEFUL FOR THEIR ATTENDANCE
AT THIS INAUGURAL MEETING. IVENTURE TO SUGGEST THAT
THEY MAY DERIVE SOME REASSURANCE FROM THE FACT H
C o%-ib~ kL
AT ANY MEETING HELD HERE, IN THIS SENATE CHrtf= FTH
THE RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF
THE STATES WILL BE AMPLY PROTECTED.
FOR AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS IN THE PAST,
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT HAS ALWAYS BEEN A SOMEWHAT REMOTE
AND PERIPHERAL CONCERN. FOR A GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA,
" THE IqORTH i MEANT ONLY A FRACTION OF THE AREA OVER
WHICH ITS RESPONSIBILITY RAN; FOR A GOVERNMENT IN
PERTH IT MEANT PERHAPS HALF ITS AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY;
FOR A GOVERNMENT IN BRISBANE OR AN ADMINISTRATION IN
DARWIN, IT MEANT NEARLY* ALL OF IT. SO I AM CONSCIOUS
OF THE FACT THAT THE GOVERNMENTS OF QUEENSLAND AND
ESTERN AUSTRALIA, AS WELL AS HAVING A GREATER NATURAL
INTEREST IN THESE REGIONS, HAVE AN ADVANTAGE OVER US IN
CANBERRA BY VIRTUE OF THEIR KNOWLEDGE OF LOCAL CONDITIONS
AND THEIR LONGER EXPERIENCE IN ADMINISTERING THE REMOTE
AREAS OF THiEIR STATES. a a 3 
-3-
N" OTHING I SAY TODAY, AND NOTHING WE ENVISAGE
THIS NEW COUNCIL DOING, SHOULD BE TAKEN AS A CRITICISM
OF THE EFFORTS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS AND NORTHERN
TERRITORY ADMINISTRATIONS IN DEVELOPING THE NORTH.
THEY HAVE DONE A GREAT DEAL. IT IS MY INTENTION,
HOWEVER, TO SEE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES, PLAYS ITS FULL PART
IN THESE ENDEAVOURS, AND THAT THE PEOPLE OF THE
NORTH HAVE THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES FOR A FULL AND
PROSPEROUS LIFE AS ALL OTHER AUSTRALIANS.. THERE
WILL BE NO MORE SECOND-CLASS CITIZENS; THERE WILL
BE NO MORE SECOND-CLASS REGIONS.
I THINK I CAN CLAIM THAT my GOVERNMENT, MORE
THAN ANY OTHER IN THE HISTORY OF FEDERAL POLITICS,
IS COMMITTED TO THE TASK AND THE CHALLENGE OF
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT. THAT COMMITMENT WAS EXPRESSED
IN MY POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO. IT WAS REFLECTED IN
THE DECISION ONE OF THE FIRST ADMINISTRATIVE ACTS
OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH THE DEPARTMENT
OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT, WHICH IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
CO-ORDINATING DEVELOPMENT IN THE AREA OF AUSTRALIA
NORTH OF THE 26TH PARALLEL. WiE BELIEVE THAT THIS
REGION RICH AS IT IS IN NATURAL RESOURCES AND
PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL POTENTIAL SHOULD RECEIVE
A RECOGNITION FROM THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT COMMENSURATE
WITH ITS CONTRIBUTION TO THE NATIONAL ECONOMY. IN ANY
ANALYSIS, THE NORTH CONTRIBUTES AS MUCH AS ANY OTHER
SECTOR OF AUSTRALIA TO OUR EARNINGS AND OUR STANDARD
OF LIVING. s s. 
-4-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALWAYS RECOGNISED
THE PROBLEMS AND DIFFICULTIES OF DEVELOPING THE NORTH
THE HIGHER COSTS OF PROJECTS IN REMOTE AND DIFFICULT
ENVIRONMENTS, THE NEED FOR SPECIAL WAGE AND OTHER
INCENTIVES TO ATTRACT WORKERS, THE HIGHER COST OF
HOUSING AND TRANSPORT, CAPITAL EQUIPMENT, BUILDINGS,
POWER, AND FERTILISERS THESE FACTORS, AND OUR
HISTORICAL PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT, HAVE PUT SOUTHERN
AUSTRALIA IN A POSITION OF GREAT COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
OVER THE NORTH, THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE PAST DECADE
ALONE, HOWEVER, HAVE CLEARLY SHOWN US THE REAL POSSIBILITIES
OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA, THE MORE WE TAKE HOLD OF THESE
OPPORTUNITIES AND ENLARGE THE RANGE OF LIFE STYLES
OPEN TO ALL AUSTRALIANS, THE MORE WE ENRICH OUR NATIONAL
CULTURE, AUSTRALIA'S SENSE OF NATIONHOOD WILL NEVER BE
FULLY REALISED WHILE OUR POLICIES AND PRE-OCCUPATIONS
REMAIN LARGELY CONFINED TO A TRIANGLE IN THE SOUTH-EAST
OF THE CONTINENT FROM BRISBANE TO ADELAIDE AND ANOTHER
IN THE SOUTH-WEST FROM PERTH TO ALBANY,
IN MY POLICY SPEECH A YEAR AGO I SAID THIS
" LABOR'S OBJECTIVE IS TO DEVELOP THE VAST AND VALUABLE
RESOURCES OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATION AND FUTURE AUSTRALIANS IT IS IN
THE NORTH THAT THE GREAT SUGAR AND CATTLE INDUSTRIES HAVE
BEEN ESTABLISHED AND IT IS IN THE NORTH THAT AUSTRALIANS
FACE THE GREATEST CHALLENGE TO RETAIN THE OWNERSHIP OF
THE NATION'S RESOURCES AND TO BASE NEW INDUSTRIES ON
THOSE RESOURCES," 
i--
THE PURPOSE OF THIS COUNCIL IS TO DEVELOP MEASURES
DESIGNED TO PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
AND THE WELFARE OF ITS PEOPLE, IT WILL INITIATE WHATEVER
STUDIES AND INVESTIGATIONS IT CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO
ACHIEVE THESE OBJECTIVES, THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE MANDATE,
I GIVE AN ASSURANCE THAT IF THE POLICIES YOU AGREE UPON
REQUIRE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL SYMPATHETICALLY EXAMINE SUCH PROPOSALS
IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES,
' IY GOVERNMENT'S BROAD NATIONAL OBJECTIVES ARE NOW
GENERALLY WELL KNOWN, THEY APPLY EQUALLY TO THE NORTH,
VIE WANT STRONG AND CONTINUING ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE
NORTH AS WELL AS THE SOUTH, OUR ECONOMIC PLANNING IS
DESIGNED TO ACHIEVE GREATER AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND
PARTICIPATION IN INDUSTRY, MAXIMUM PROCESSING OF OUR
RESOURCES AND FAIR EXPORT PRICES, AT ALL TIMES DUE
ACCOUNT WILL BE TAKEN OF THE NEEDS OF CONSERVATION,
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS AND ABORIGINAL RIGHTS, I BELIEVE
THAT THESE OBJECTIVES REFLECT THE FEELINGS AND ASPIRATIONS
OF MOST AUSTRALIANS, I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT THE PURSUIT OF
THESE OBJECTIVES WILL CREATE UNDUE DIFFICULTIES FOR OUR
INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING THE MINING INDUSTRY, IT WILL,
HOWEVER, REQUIRE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND
INDUSTRY IN THE PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTAL PROJECTS, 
6-
THERE IS AN URGENT NEED FOR SUCH CO-OPERATION AND
PLANNING. DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN THE PAST NEW TOWNSHIPS,
RAILWAYS AND PORTS, PARTICULARLY IN THE NORTH FREQUENTLY
WENT AHEAD WITHOUT REGARD FOR OVERALL NATIONAL POLICY OR NEEDS.
WIE MUST ENSURE THAT FUTURE DEVELOPMENT IS GUIDED BY NATIONAL
AS WELL AS LOCAL CONSIDERATIONS. SUCH NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
ARE BEHIND THE IMAGINATIVE PILBARA DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT
WHICH IS NOW THE SUBJECT OF JOINT DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN AND WESTERN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, WE
WANT THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW REGIONAL CENTRE, WITH CHEAP
POWER, CO-ORDINATED TRANSPORT AND PORT FAC-ILITIES, TO BE
PLANNED IN A WAY THAT WILL PERMIT THE BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF THE RESOURCES IN THE REGION TO THE MUTUAL ADVANTAGE OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE NATION AND THE PARTICIPATING
COMMERICAL INTERESTS, MUCH THE SAME THINKING IFS BFHIND
my GOVERNMENT'S INITIATIVE IN PROVIDING FtJND. S FOR A
COMPREHENJSIVE LEVALUIOr OF THE RESOURCES OF THiL
BURDEKIN AND BOWEN B3ASINS IN QUEENSLAND.
IEMPHASISE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS NOT
PREPARED TO ALLOW THE TEMPO AND DETAIL OF NORTHERN
DEVELOPMENT TO BE DETERMINED B3Y MARKET FORCES ALONE.
IF WE WERE TO DO SO, WE WOULD PFRPETUATE THE CONDITIOS
WHICH HAVE CHARACTER ISED OUR NATPNTAL [ DEVELOPMENT OVER
THE PAST GENERATION. HISTORY MAY WELL JUDGE OUR GENERATION
HARSHLY WHEN IT IS RECALLED THAT OF OUR TOTAL
POPULATION INCREASE OF NEARLY 5 MILLION PEOPLE SINCE 1949
HAS OCCURRED IN THE CAPITAL CITIES, AND OVER 50% HAVE
SETTLED IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE ALONE. ' e o/ 1 
-7-
I AM NOT CONCERNED TODAY TO DISCUSS THE GROWING PROBLEMS
OF OUR CITIES. THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY TAKEN CERTAIN
STEPS TO ALLEVIATE THE MORE PRESSING OF THESE PROBLEMS.
IT WOULD, HOWEVER, BE WHOLLY CONSISTENT WITH OUR
POLICIES OF URBAN RENEWAL AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW
GROWTH CENTRES IF THE TEMPO OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT
WERE INCREASED, AND GREATER INCENTIVES WERE PROVIDED
FOR MORE AND MORE PEOPLE TO MOVE TO THE SPARSELY
POPULATED NORTHERN REGIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
THE PURPOSE OF THIS INAUGURAL MEETING IS TO CONSIDER
THE PROCEDURES AND ARRANGEMENTS TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE
COUNCIL IN FUTURE. I HOPE THE COUNCIL WILL MEET
REGULARLY AT LEAST TWICE A YEAR IN ORDER TO AVOID
THE AD HOC APPROACH TO NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT IN THE PAST.
MY GOVERNMENT AND I WOULD EXPECT FUTURE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS WILL LOOK INCREASINGLY TO THIS COUNCIL
FOR SOUND ADVICE ON THE DEVELOPMENTAL NEEDS OF THE
NORTH. WE KNOW OF THE RESOURCES AND THE DIFFICULTIES
WELL ENOUGH. '.' IHAT ALL OUR GOVERNMENTS NEED IS DETAILED
AND EXPERT ADVICE ON HOW TO DEVELOP THOSE RESOURCES AND
OVERCOME THOSE DIFFICULTIES. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THIS
COUNCIL MARKS A NEW PHASE IN FEDERAL-STATE RELATIONS IN
A PARTICULARLY DIFFICULT AREA OF UNDOUBTED NATIONAL
IMPORTANCE. I AM CONFIDENT THAT THIS COUNCIL WILL BRING
NEW VIGOUR AND NEW IDEAS TO OUR POLICIES FOR NORTHERN
DEVELOPMENT AND MAKE A MOST SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE
PROGRESS OF OUR NATION AND THE LIVING STANDARDS OF ITS
PEOPLE. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIISTER
MR, E. G. WHITLAM, MP.,
AT THE UNVEILING OF THE EUREKA FLAG,
BALLARAT FINE ART GALLERY,
BALLARAT, 3 DECEMBER
1973
NO DOUBT MY OPPONENTS WOULD SAY THAT THE CHIEF LESSON
OF EUREKA IS A SIMPLE ONE: THE GOVERNMENT WAS NO MORE POPULAR
WITH MINING INTERESTS IN THE MID-NINETEENTH CENTURY THAN THE
PRESEN4T GOVERNMENT IS TODAY. NEVERTHELESS, I HAVE ALWAYS THOUGHT
IT AN AUSPICIOUS COINCIDENCE THAT THE ELECTION OF THE FIRST
NATIONAL LABOR GOVERNM4ENT FOR 23 YEARS SHOULD HAVE OCCURRED,
ALMOST TO THE DAY, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE EUREKA STOCKADE.
NOT THAT MY PARTY CLAIMS ANY MONOPOLY OF PATRIOTIC SENTIMENT,
ANY EXCLUSIVE AFFINITY WITH THE SYMBOLS OF AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.,
EUREKA HAD LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO. WITH THE FORMULATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY. IT HAD LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO WITH
THE GREAT MOVEMENT FOR FEDERATION THE MOVEMENT THAT CAME
TO FRUITION HALF A CENTURY AFTER EUREKA IN THE EMERGENCE OF
AN AUSTRALIAN NATION. YET WE IN THE LABOR PARTY'-WOULD
BE LESS THAN HUMAN IF WE DID NOT SEE IN THE EVENTS OF EUREKA
SAD AND REMOTE AND ISOLATED AS THEY WERE A SYMBOL OF THE PRIDE
THE INDEPENDENCE OF SPIRIT, THE DEMOCRATIC TRADITIONS AND THE
STRONG NATIONALIST ASPIRATIONS FOR WHICH LABOR HAS ALWAYS STOOD,.
AND WITH WHICH THE NEW GOVERNMENT IS ESPECIALLY IDENTIFIED. 
-2-
I HOPE YOU WILL FORGIVE ME FOR STRIKING THIS PARTISAN
NOTE, IT IS A TRUISM, PERHAPS, THAT THE IMPORTANCE OF AN
HISTORICAL EVENT LIES NOT IN WHAT HAPPENED BUT IN WHAT
LATER GENERATIONS BELIEVE TO HAVE HAPPENED, ON THAT SCORE,
THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT OF EUREKA'S IMPORTANCE TO THE LABOR
PARTY AND TO AUSTRALIA, HISTORY IS A PROCESS OF COLLECTIVE
REMEMBRANCE; AND BEYOND QUESTION THE EVENTS OF 3 DECEMBER
1854 PERSIST IN THE MEMORY AND CONSCIOUSNESS OF OUR PEOPLE
IN THE WORDS OF ONE WRITER AS " THE PIONEER AND SUPREME
AUSTRALIAN EVENT IN THE SPECTACULAR SENSE," DR, EVATT, A GREAT
STATESMAN AND A PERCEPTIVE HISTORIAN, WENT SO FAR AS TO DECLARE
THAT " AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRACY WAS BORN AT EUREKA", I ACCEPT THAT
JUDGEMENT, AND HERE, IN THE CITY AND BIRTHPLACE OF EUREKA,
I PROCLAIM THE CENTRAL AND ENDURING RELEVANCE OF THOSE EVENTS
TO OUR OWN DAY, TO THE GREAT REFORMS IN OUR NATIONAL LIFE AND
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS ON WHICH THIS COUNTRY IS EMBARKED, AND
THE CREATION OF THE MORE JUST AND HUMANE SOCIETY TO WHICH MY
GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED,
YOU'HEAR MUCH THESE DAYS OF THE " NEW NATIONALISM"
OF ALL THE SLOGANS APPLIED TO MY GOVERNMENT, I THINK IT IS THE
ONLY ONE OF WHICH I CANNOT CLAIM THE AUTHORSHIP, LIKE A GREAT
NUMBER OF THINGS, IT WAS INVENTED BY THE PRESS, YET I AM HAPPY
TO ADOPT AND AFFIRM IT, THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE WHO SEE SOMETHING
SINISTER OR THREATENING IN THE IDEA OF A " NEW NATIONALISM" SOME
DISTURBANCE TO OUR WAY OF LIFE, THE OVERTURNING OF RECEIVED IDEAS
AND SETTLED TRADITIONS, THE BREAKING OFF OF OLD FRIENDSHIPS,
THAT IS NOT WHAT WE INTEND THE NEW NATIONALISM TO MEAN, 
-3-
RATHER THAN DISCARD OUR AUTHENTIC TRADITIONS, WE WANT
TO RESTORE AND INVIGORATE THEM. RATHER THAN BREAK OFF OLD
FRIENDSHIPS, WE WANT TO FORM NEW. ONES FRIENDSHIPS THAT WILL
ENHANCE OUR NAME AND REPUTATION IN THE WORLD AS A GOOD FRIEND,
A CONCERNED AND HELPFUL PARTNER IN OUR REGION AND BEYOND.
RATHER THAN OVERTURN THE TRUE VALUES OF AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,
WE WANT TO RESURRECT AND FOSTER THOSE VALUES. THE LABOR PARTY,
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, HAS NEVER HAD ANY DOUBT ABOUT WHAT
THOSE VALUES WERE. THEY WERE, IN TRUTH, IDENTIFIED AND PROCLAIMED
AT EUREKA JUSTICE, FREEDOM, INDEPENDENCE,
FRATERNITY, THE INSTINCT FOR FAIR PLAY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE. EGALITARIANISM BY WHATEVER NAME
WE CALL IT IS AT THE HEART OF\ AUSTRALIAN TRADITION.
INTANGIBLE AS THESE VALUES ARE, THEY HAVE A VERY REAL
MEANING FOR THE LABOR PARTY, THEY ARE CLEARLY EXPRESSED IN THE
PLATFORM OF THE PARTY AND IN THE POLICIES OF THE GOVERNMENT.
ANYONE READING THE PLATFORM WILL BE STRUCK BY THE EMPHASIS
ON " AUSTRALIA", THE " AUSTRALIAN NATION", ON NATIONAL GOALS AND
ASPIRATIONS, ALONE AMONG'THE PARTIES WE AFFIRM THE SUPREMACY
OF AUSTRALIAN SOVEREIGNTY OVER THE WHOLE NATION AND ITS
TERRITORIES. ANYONE WHO HAS STUDIED THE RECORD OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACHIEVEMENTS SINCE COMING TO OFFICE WILL RECOGNISE THIS NATIONALIST
SENTIMENT AS THE GREAT BINDING THEME OF ALL OUR MAJOR DECISIONS
AND INITIATIVES. I I, 
-4
AS A PHILOSOPHY, A MODUS LIVEIADI FOR THE NEW GOVERNMENT,
THE / INEW NATIONALISM If BRINGS TOGETHER A GREAT NUMBER OF DIVERSE
STRANDS AND ATTITUDES AND AMBITIONS. IT MEANS,
THE GREATEST POSSIBLE MEASURE OF AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OVER OUR
INDUSTRIES AND RESOURCES. IT MEANS AN INDEPENDENT FOREIGN
POLICY NOT ONE WITHOUT ALLIES, BUT ONE WITHOUT OBSESSIONS,
WITHOUT DISTORTIONS, WITHOUT SUBJECTION TO THE IDEOLOGIES OR
FOLLIES OF OTHER POWERS. IT MEANS THE CREATION OF A ROBUST AND
THRIVING ECONOMY BY WHICH THE TALENTS AND SKILLS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS
CAN BE FULFILLED. IT MEANS STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPING
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES, INCLUDING RURAL INDUSTRIES, TO. MAKE.
THEM MORE RESILIENT AND COMPETITIVE IN A CHANGING
WORLD. IT MEANS THE FULLEST PARTICIPATION OF AUSTRALIANS IN
DECISIONS INVOLVING THEIR OWN DESTINY. IT MEANS THE PRESERVATION
OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE OUR HISTORIC BUILDINGS, AND NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT. IT MEANS THE PROTECTION OF ABORIGINAL CULTURE
AND TRADITIONS AS THE ORIGINAL AND MOST AUTHENTIC EXPRESSION OF
AN AUSTRALIAN IDENTITY. IT MEANS THE CULTIVATION OF VITALITY AND
CREATIVENESS IN THE ARTS, IN ORDER TO IMPART To AUSTRALIAN LIFE
A VIGOROUS AND DISTINCTIVE INTELLECTUAL IMPETUS.
THERE IS NOTHING COARSE OR INTOLERANT OR XENOPHOBIC
ABOUT THIS KIND OF NATIONALISM. IT DOES NOT MEAN CLOSING OUR SOCIETY
TO BENEFICIAL IDEAS FROM ABROAD. AN AUTHENTIC AUSTRALIANSIM
CAN READILY ACCOMMODATE FOREIGN INFLUENCES AND FOREIGN CULTURES,
JUST AS WE HAVE PROSPERED FROM THE POST-WAR PROGRAM OF IMMIGRATION.
THEY WERE MIGRANTS, AFTER ALL IRISH, EUROPEAN, AMERICAN WHO
PROVIDED THE BACKBONE OF THE EUREKA RISING, NOR DO I CARE FOR
THE ARGUMENT THAT A " tNEW NATIONALISM' IS OUTMODED OR EVEN DANGEROUS
IN A WORLD THAT HAS SUFFERED TOO MUCH FROM NATIONALISTIC HATREDS
AND PASSIONS AND STRIVES ONLY FOR PEACE AND SECURITY BASED ON 
INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING, NO GOVERNMENT IS MORE COMMITTED THAN
MINE TO INTERNATIONALISM IN THIS HIGHEST SENSE, YET IF WE LOOK
AT THE NATIONS, EXCLUDING THE MAJOR POWERS, THAT HAVE ADVANCED
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION THE MOST INDIA, CANADA, THE
SCANDANAVIAN COUNTRIES WE FIND THEY ARE NATIONS WITH A SECURE
AND DISTINCTIVE NATIONAL IDENTITY OF THEIR OWN, ECHOES AND
SHADOWS, SATELLITES AND VASSALS ARE NOT FORCES FOR PEACE AND
CO-OPERATION: THEY ARE MORE LIKELY TO BE THE FIRST VICTIMS
WHEN PEACE AND CO-OPERATION ARE OVERTHROWN,
DURING THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN LAST YEAR, I ANNOUNCED THAT
A LABOR GOVERNMENT WOULD OFFICIALLY PROCLAIM A NEW AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL ANTHEM, THIS YEAR A COMPETITION WAS HELD TO SEE IF
ANYONE COULD PRODUCE BETTER WORDS AND MUSIC THAN THE SONGS
WE HAVE ALREADY, THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT THAT EXERCISE WAS
NOT THE QUALITY OF THE ENTRIES THERE ARE VERY FEW PEOPLE WHO
CAN COMPOSE GOOD WORDS AND MUSIC BUT THE QUANTITY, THERE WERE
MORE THAN 1300 ANTHEMS, GIVEN THE DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED, THAT
WAS A CONSIDERABLE AND HEARTENING RESPONSE, THERE IS NO DOUBT
IN MY MIND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WANT A NATIONAL ANTHEM
OF THEIR OWN AN ANTHEM THAT TRULY REFLECTS THE CHARACTER AND
TRADITIONS OF OUR PEOPLE, NEXT YEAR WE SHALL HAVE SUCH AN ANTHEM,
THERE IS NOTHING EXCESSIVE. OR JINGOISTIC INTHE PROPuSITION THAT
AUSTRALIA SHOULD NO LONGER BE WILLING TO SHARE A NATIONAL ANTHEM
WITH ANOTHER COUNTRY, 
6-
I CONGRATULATE THOSE WHO HAVE PRESERVED AND RESTORED
THIS HISTORIC FLAG, IT IS FITTING THAT IT SHOULD REMAIN HERE IN
BALLARAT, IN THIS GALLERY, AS A-' RELIC OF EUREKA. OUR PAST IS
DEFICIENT IN TURBULENT EVENTS, IN THE CIVIL CONVULSIONS AND
UPHEAVALS THAT PROVIDE FOR OLDER CIVILISATIONS A FOCUS FOR
NATIONALISTIC FERVOUR AND POPULAR EMOTION, THOSE SYMBOLS AND
RITUALS WE HAVE, LIKE OUR PARLIAMENTARY AND CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM
ITSELF, DERIVE FROM A QUIESCENT COLONIAL PAST. I AM NOT ONE TO
ARGUE, AS SOME ROMANTICS DO, THAT TRUE NATIONHOOD MUST SPRING
FROM THE AGONY AND SUFFERING ENDURED BY FORMER GENERATIONS.
YET IS IN THE NATURE OF THINGS THAT AN EVENT LIKE EUREKA
WITH ALL ITS ASSOCIATIONS, WITH ALL ITS POTENT SYMBOLISM,, WILL
ACQUIRE AN AURA OF EXCITMENT AND ROMANCE, AND STIR THE IMAGINATION
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE.
DR. JOHNSON REMARKED THAT PATRIOTISM IS THE LAST REFUGE
OF A SCOUNDREL. HE WAS WELL AWARE THAT PATRIOTISM CAN BE CARRIED
TO EXTREMES, AND THAT NATIONALISM CAN BE CARRIED TO EXCESS.
THERE IS NEVERTHELESS A KIND OF NATIONALISM THAT EVERY COUNTRY
NEEDS. IT IS A BENIGN AND CONSTRUCTIVE NATIONALISM. IT HAS TO DO
WITH SELF-CONFIDENCE, WITH MATURITY, WITH ORIGINALITY, WITH
INDEPENDENCE, OF MIND. IF AUSTRALIA IS TO REMAIN IN THE
FOREFRONT OF NATIONS, IF TO RESIST T HE TEMPTATION TO BE
A SECOND-RATE OR IMITATIVE SOCIETY, '-IF . DETERMINED TO BE A
TRUE SOURCE OF POWER AND IDEAS IN THE WORLD,,
AGENEROUS AND TOLERANT AS A itj1J
RESPECTED FOR OUR GENEROSITY AND TOLERANCE, THEN
IBELIEVE THAT SOMETHING LIKE THE " NEW NATIONALISM" MUST PLAY A
PART IN OUR GOVERNMENT AND IN THE LIVES OF US ALL. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME M1INISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., o
FOR THE UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATION HUMAN RIGHTS DAY, AIN. US,
CANBERRA, 10 DECEMBER, 1973*
TODAY IS THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ADOPTION OF THE
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE UNITED NATIONS1
THAT DECLARATION HAS COME TO BE RECOGNISED AS ONE OF
THE GREAT ENLIGHTENED EVENTS IN MODERN HISTORY. ITS ANNIVERSARY
MARKS THE BEGINNING OF AN EQUALLY HOPEFUL AND ENLIGHTENED
MOVEMENT, FOR THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY HAS ALSO DECIDED TO LAUNCH
ON THIS DAY A DECADE FOR ACTION TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL
DISCRItINATION. IT IS IN THE CONTEXT OF THESE TWO GREAT
ACHIEVEMENTS THE CELEBRATION OF ONE HISTORIC ERA AND THE
INAUGUR~ ATION OF ANOTHER THAT I WISH TO SPEAK TO YOU OF
AUSTRALIA ' S PART IN FURTHERING THE CAUSE OF HUMAN RIGHTS FOR
THE WORLD'IS PEOPLE.
IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR ME, IN DOING SO, TO POINT TO
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE POLITICAL PARTIES ON THIS ISSUE. I HOPE
YOU WILL UNDERSTAND MY PURPOSE IN DOING SO~ I HAVE NO WISH
TO BE OVERTLY PARTISAN, BUT I CANNOT EXPLAIN THE POLICIES OF
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT WITHOUT DRAWING ATTENTION TO THOSE OF
OUR PREDECESSORS. IT WILL BE SEEN, IN MANY CASES, I BELIEVE,
THAT THE RECORD OF OUR PREDECESSORS WAS ONE OF NEGLIGENCE AND
INACTION, AND IN THIS CRUCIAL AREA OF FOREIGN POLICY, NEGLIGENCE
AND INACTION CANNOT BE TOLERATED. THE STRUGGLE FOR UNIVERSAL
HUMAN RIGHTS IS A PROTRACTED AND PERHAPS AN UNENDING STRUGGLE. 
-2-
THERE IS RARELY A TIME IN WORLD AFFAIRS WHEN SOME NEW THREAT
TO HUMAN RIGHTS SOME NEW OPPRESSION, SOME NEW FORM OF DEPOTISM
IS NOT ABROAD, GOVERNMENTS HAVE A CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO DO
ALL IN THEIR POWER TO PROMOTE RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, No
COUNTRY HAS A GREATER OBLIGATION IN THIS REGARD THAN AUSTRALIA,
A MEDIUM POWER ENJOYING CLOSE AND CORDIAL RELATIONS WITH MANY
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES WITH DIFFERENT POLITICAL'SYSTEMS1
IT IS A FUNDAMENTAL OBJFCTIVE OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT TO
ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES ARE SOUNDLY BASED ON RESPECT
FOR, AND ON THE PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT OF, CIVIL LIBERTIES
AND BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS, , WE BELIEVE THAT POLICIES AND ATTITUDES
TO HUMAN RIGHTS CANNOT BE SEPARATED FROM ACTION AGAINST THE EVILS
OF DISCRIMINATION IN ANY FORM, INCLUDING DISCRIMINATION BASED ON
RACE, OUR POLICIES AND ACTIONS OVER THE PAST-YEAR HAVE BEEN
DELIBERATELY DESIGNED TO GET AWAY FROM THE TENTATIVE AND DILATORY
ATTITUDES OF THE PAST, THE RECORD OF OUR PREDECESSORS WAS MARKED
BY A LACK OF ANY SENSE OF INITIATIVE IN THE PROMOTION AND
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN OUR OWN COMMUNITY AND IN THE WORLD
AT LARGE, THEY WERE HALF-HEARTED IN RESPONDING TO THE WORK OF
THE UNITED NATIONS, AND THEIR LACK OF ENTHUSIASM WAS USUALLY
MATCHED IN THE RESPONSE OF THE STATES. 
0 -3-
LET ME GIVE A TYPICAL EXAMPLE. AS A RESULT OF AN
OBLIGATION ARISING FROM THE 1946 AMENDMENTS TO THE
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION CONSTITUTION, THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN 1947 INSTITUTED AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE. OF THE
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE DEPARTMENTS OF LABOUR TO CARRY OUT AN
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE WHOLE RANGE OF LABOUR MATTERS AROUND APRIL
OF EACH YEAR. THIS MACHINERY WAS IN EXISTENCE THROUGHOUT THETERM
OF OFFICE OF OUR PREDECESSORS BUT IT WAS ONLY WHEN THE
PRESENT GOVERNMENT CAME TO POWER THAT THE MINISTER FOR LABOUR,
MR. CLYDE CAMERON, TOOK THE INITIATIVE TO USE THIS MACHINERY
TO GIVE ACTIVE ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE RATIFICATION AND APPLICATION
OF I. L. O. CONVENTIONS. " MR. CAMERON HAS MOVED QUICKLY TO' ESTABLISH
CONSULTATIVE MACHINERY WITH THE STATES AT MINISTERIAL, PERMANENT
HEAD, AND TECHNICAL OFFICER LEVEL TO DETERMINE AN ORDER* OF
ORIORITY FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF CONVENTIONS AND TO ENSURE THAT
ACTION 15 TAKEN ON THESE CONVENTIONS REGARDED AS REQUIRING
URGENT OUR PREDECESSORS MADE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM A FARCE BY
USING IT AS AN EXCUSE TO JUSTIFY ITS OWN INACTION. THEY DID
LITTLE OR NOTHING TO STIMULATE ACTION ON THE PART OF THE STATES.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY AVOIDED THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF
I. L. O. CONVENTION No. 100 EQUAL REMUNERATION, 19511 BY HIDING
BEHIND THE CHANGES OF MINDS ON THE PART OF TWO OF THE STATES
TOWARDS RATIFICATION AND THE UNWILLINGNESS OF THE OTHER
TO AGREE TO RATIFICATION. IT IS TRUE THAT BECAUSE OF THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM AUSTRALIA IS AT A DISADVANTAGE IN BEING FACED
WITH UNNECESSARILY COMPLICATED PROCEDURES FOR GIVING EFFECT
TO INTERNATIONAL LEGAL INSTRUMENTS. THESE DEFICIENC* IES IN OUR 
-4-
SYSTEM SHOULD NOT BE ALLOWED TO BESMIRCH AND AFFRONT AUSTRALIA'S
IMAGE. OUR GOVERNMENT HAS ACCORDINGLY FOUND IT NECESSARY TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE B( TERNAL AFFAIRS POWER IN THE CONSTITUTION
TO GIVE EFFECT 70TO OUR INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS.
To MY MIND, THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION IS ONE OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT AND ENLIGHTENED ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE UNITED
NATIONS. THE CELEBRATION OF THIS ANNIVERSARY AFFORDS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE GOVERNMENT TO RE-DEDICATE ITSELF TO THE
PROMOTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA; THE ASSOCIATION
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY WITH THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
DATES FROM THE DRAFTING OF THE DOCUMENT IN WHICH DR. EVATT,
AS MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL TOOK A
CLOSE PERSONAL INTEREST. HE WAS PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
WHEN THE DECLARATION WAS ADOPTED. HE SAID ON THAT OCCASION
THAT THE DOCUMENT " WAS BACKED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE BODY OF
OPINION OF THE UNITED NATIONS AS A WHOLE AND MILLIONS OF PEOPLE,
MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN ALL OVER THE WORLD WOULD TURN TO IT FOR
HELP, GUIDANCE AND INSPIRATION." THROUGHOUT MY PARLIAMENTARY
CAREER I HAVE TAKEN A KEEN PERSONAL INTEREST IN ALL ASPECTS
OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND IN PARTICULAR IN THE PROGRESS MADE BY
AUSTRALIA TOWARDS RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
AGREEMENTS. 
ONE OF MY EARLIEST ACTIONS AS PRIME MINISTER WAS TO INITIATE
AN EXAMINATION OF ALL THE INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS'CONCERNED
WITH HUMAN RIGHTS TO DETERMINE THE ACTION WE SHOULD BE TAKING
TO GIVE EFFECT rO THEM. WE SIGNED THE TWO'UNITED NATIONS HUMAN
RIGHTS COVENANTS ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS AND ON ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS ON 18 DECEMBER 19721* THE COVENANTS
COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER AND WERE ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
IN 1966. IT IS THE INTENTION OF THE GOVERNMENT TO PROCEED TO
SIMULTANEOUS RATIFICATION OF THEM AS SOON AS ENABLING LEGISLATION
HAS BEEN PASSED BY PARLIAMENT.
THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION IS A FOCUS OF ATTENTION FOR
THE ASPIRATIONS OF ALL NATIONS AND PEOPLES CONCERNED WITH BASIC
RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS. THOUGH THE DECLARATION HAS INFLUENCED THE
LEGAL STANDARDS OF OTHER COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD IN SUCH
DOCUMENTS AS THE CANADIAN BILL OF RIGHTS., 1960, AND THE BASIC
LAW OF THE GERMAN FEDERAL REPUBLIC, 1949, EXISTING LAWS IN
AUSTRALIA HAVE NOT ADEQUATELY PROTECTED THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS
OF THE INDIVIDUAL AS SET OUT IN THE DECLARATION. THjE GOVERNMENT
IS ACTING TO CORRECT THIS SITUATION. ON 21 NOVEMBER T: hE ATTORNEY--
GEN4ERAL, SENATOR LIONEL MURPHY, INTRODUCED INTO THE PARLIAMENT,
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL 1973 AND THE RACIAL DiSCRIMINATIPH BILL-1973,
BOTH BILLS ARE DESIGNED TO EXTEND AND SAFEGUARD THE RIGHTS ANiD
FREEDOMS OF EVERY AUSTRALIAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS. 
-6-
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL WILL GUARANTEE THAT EVERYONE
IS ENTITLED TO THE EQUAL PROTECTION OF THE LAW AND TO CERTAIN
BASIC RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS, INCLUDING THE FREEDOM OF THOUGHT,
CONSCIENCE AND RELIGION; FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION; FREEDOM OF
PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION; FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT; THE
RIGHT TO VOTE AND TO EXERCISE PUBLIC FUNCTIONS ON-A BASIS OF
EQUALITY; THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY; FREEDOM FROM ARBITRARY ARREST
AND DETENTION; THE RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL; AND FREEDOM FROM
CRUEL OR DEGRADING TREATEMENT OR PUNISHMENT. To SAFEGUARD THE
PROTECTION OF THESE RIGHTS, THE BILL ESTABLISHES THE OFFICE OF
A HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER. HIS TASK WILL BE TO EXAMINE ANY
BREACHES OF INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY IN THIS COUNTRY AND WHERE NECESSARY
TO BRING LEGAL ACTION TO ENSURE THAT THE LAW WITH REGARD TO
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS IS ENFORCED.
MANY AUSTRALIANS TAKE THE EXISTENCE OF THESE RIGHTS FOR
GRANTED. THEY HAVE NOT APPRECIATED THE NEED FOR ACTION TO
ENSURE THAT THE RIGHTS ARE PROTECTED AND GUARANTEED WITH THE
FULL FORCE OF LAW. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL IS
THAT IT WILL MAKE THESE BASIC RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS LEGALLY
ENFORCEABLE IN AUSTRALIA. THE. INDIVIDUAL WILL BE ABLE, THROUGH
THE COURTS, TO INSIST UPON HIS RIGHTS. 
0 -7-
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL ALSO SEEKS APPROVAL FOR RATIFICATION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN
( 1952). AUSTRALIA HAS NOT PREVIOUSLY BECOME A PARTY TO THIS
CONVENTION BECAUSE THERE ARE STATUTORY LIMITATIONS AND
DISCRIMINATORY ASPECTS OF VARIOUS STATE LAWS IN AUSTRALIA WHICH
DO NOT COMPLY WITH ITS PROVISIONS1 THE ABILITY OF THE
GOVERNMENT TO RATIFY THIS CONVENTION WILL BE A MAJOR STEP
FORWARD IN PROMOTING THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN THROUGHOUT OUR COMMUNITY
ON EQUAL TERMS WITH MEN WIT7HOUT ANY-DISCRIMINATION8
THE FIRST ARTICLE OF -1-1L UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN
RIGHTS PROCLAIMS THAT " ALL HUMAN BEINGS ARE BORN FREE AND EQUAL
IN DIGNITY AND RIGHTS", ARTICLE 2 STATES THAT " EVERYONE IS
ENTITLED TO THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS SET OUT IN THE DECLARATION
WITHOUT DISTINCTION OF ANY KINDo INCLUDING DISCRIMINATION ON THE
GROUNDS OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONAL ORIGIN" THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ELABORATED ON THESE ARTICLES WHEN, IN 1965, j IT ADOPTED AN
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION. THE CONVENTION RECOGNISES THAT ANY
DOCTRINE OF SUPERIORITY BASED ON RACIAL DIFFERENCE IS FUNDAMENTALLY
FALSE, MORALLY INDEFENSIBLE AND WITHOUT ANY SOCIAL JUSTIFICATION.
SEVENTY-FIVE COUNTRIES HAVE SO FAR BECOME PARTIES TO THE
CONVENTION ON WHICH OUR RACIAL DISCRIMINATION BILL IS BASED.
As PROVIDED UNDER CLAUSE 6, AUSTRALIA WILL RAT'IFY THE
CONVENTION AS SOON AS THE BILL IS APPROVED. 
-8-
THE PASSAGE OF THIS BILL AND THE RATIFICATION OF THE
CONVENTION WILL BE AMONG THE MOST IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION,
WHICH AUSTRALIA CAN MAKE TO THE INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN TO
ELIMINATE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE DECADE BEING INAUGURATED
TODAY. THE GOVERNMENT IS ALREADY WELL PLACED TO PARTICIPATE
POSITIVELY IN THE INTERNATIONAL DECADE BY THE STAND WE HAVE
TAKEN IN THE UNITED NATIONS IN FORCEFULLY CONDEMNING ALL FORMS
OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND BY OUR VOTES CONDEMNING THE POLICIES
AND PRACTICES OF APARTHEID AND COLONIALISM.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS BILL AND THE RACIAL DISCRIMINATION BILL
ARE OF SPECIAL INTEREST AND RELEVANCE TO ALL SECTIONS OF OUR
COMMUNITY, PARTICULARLY OUR ABORIGINAL AND MIGRANT COMMUNITIES
WHO HAVE SUFFERED VARIOUS FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION. THE BILLS
ARE AN IMPORTANT PART OF THE GOVERNMENT'S EFFORT TO ENSURE THAT
THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MIGRATED TO THIS COUNTRY ARE TRULY EQUAL BEFORE THE LAW AND ARE
ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN AUSTRALIAN LIFE ON EQUAL TERMS WITH THE
REST OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY. THE BILLS COMPLEMENT THE
POLICIES WHICH WE ARE ENDEAVOURING TO PURSUE IN ESTABLISHING
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS AND IMPROVING THE GENERAL WELL-BEING OF
THE ABORIGINAL COMMUNITY. 
-9-
A MAJOR STEP FORWARD IN HUMAN RIGHTS WAS THE DECLARATION
BY THE GOVERNMENT THIS YEAR OF A NATIONAL POLICY To ELIMINATE
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION. MR. CAMERON
ANNOUNCED THIS POLICY IN A STATEMENT IN THE PARLIAMENT IN MAY
CONCERNING THE ACTION BEING TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT TO RATIFY
THE TUL. O. CONVENTION No. 111 ON DISCRIMINATION ( EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION) 1958, AUSTRALIA RATIFIED'THIS CONVENTION ON
JUNE. THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY TO ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION HAS THE SUPPORT OF ALL STATE GOVERNMENTS,
MAJOR EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS AND T HE TRADE UNIONS. THE GOVERNMENT
HAS ESTABLISHED COMMITTEES ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL AND IN ALL STATES. STEPS HAVE
ALREADY BEEN TAKEN TO LAUNCH A NATION-WIDE EDUCATION CAMPAIGN
AIMED AT INFLUENCING COMMUNITY ATTITUDES IN ORDER TO REMOVE
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES IN EMPLOYMENT.
A MAJOR ROLE OF THE COMMITTEES IS TO INVESTIGATE
COMPLAINTS OF DISCRIMINATION AND TO DEAL WITH THEM EFFECTIVELy.
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EmPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION HAS THE SPECIAL FUNCTION OF ADVISING THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL
EDUCATION PUBLICITY CAMPAI6 N TO PROMOTE REAL EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNI r
IN EMPLOYMENT. 
THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA OWE A
CONSIDERABLE DEBT TO THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
FOR ITS WORK IN DEVELOPING POSITIVE POLICIES WHICH PAY FULL
RESPECT TO HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE FIELDS OF EMPLOYMENT AND
OCCUPATION. IN ADDITION TO THE CONVENTION ON DISCRIMINATION
( EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION) AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO RATIFIED TWO
OTHER IMPORTANT HUMAN RIGHTS CONVENT. IONS OF THE I... DURING
THE YEAR: CONVENTION NO. 87 FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT To0 ORGANISE, 1948;
CONVENTION No 98 RIGHT XPORGANISE AND
COLLECTIVE WAGAINING, 14
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOW CLOSE TO FULFILLING ITS* OBJECTIVE
OF RATIFYING ALL THE 11L. O. CONVENTIONS IN THE FIELD OF HOiMAN
RIGHTS. THERE REMAIN OUTSTANDING CONVENTION No. 100 EQUAL
REMUNERAT ION, 1951, AND CONVENTION No. 107 PROTECTION AND
INTEGRATION OF INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL POPULATIONS, 1957. THE
GOVERNMENT IS GiVING PRIORITY ATTENTION TO THE RATIFICATION OF
THESE TWO CONVENTIONS.
THE FURTHER ACTION WHICH THE GOVERNMENT IS ABLE TO TAKE
IN REGARD TO THE RATIFICATION OF I. L. O, CONVENTION No. 100
WILL DEPEND UPON THE CONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE
WHICH WILL SOON COME BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION AND
ARBITRATION COMMISSION, CONVENTION No. 107 IS CLOSELY CONNECTED
WITH THE QUESTION OF ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS WHICH IS CURRENTLY
THE SUBJECT OF STUDY BY THE COMMISSION HEADED BY MR. JUSTICE
A. E. WOODWARD. THE WOODWARD COMMISSION HAS COMMENTED IN ITS 
PRELIMINARY REPORT THAT IT IS IMPORTANT THAT NO ACTION BE TAKEN
TO PREJUDICE EVENTUAL AUSTRALIAN RATIFICATION OF CONVENTION No,
107 WHICH EMPHASISES THE RECOGNITION OF THE RIGHT TO OWNERSHIP BY
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES OF THE LANDS THEY TRADITIONALLY OCCUPY.
THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO AIMING IN THE NEAR FUTURE TO
MAKE FURTHER ADVANCES IN BRINGING WORK STA NDARDS. IN AUSTRALIA
UP TO THE HIGHEST INTERNATIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND SOCIAL LEVELS,
THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR IS CONSULTING WITH THREE STATE GOVERNMENTS
ABOUT THE REMOVAL OF HINDRANCES To AUSTRALIAN RATIFICATION OF
CONVENTION No. 81, LABOUR INSPECTION,$ 1946. CON* SULTATIONS ARE
ALSO CONTINUING BETWEEN-OFFICERS OF AUSTRALIAN AND STATE,
DEPARTMENTS TO DETERMINE WHAT STEPS MIGHT BE NEEDED TO -INTRODUCE
LEGISLATION IN AUSTRALIA TO COMPLY WITH CONVENTION No. 135,
PROTECTION AND FACILITIES AFFORDED TO WORKERS REPRESENTATIVES, 1971,
WHICH CAME INTO FORCE ON 30 JUNE THIS YEAR, AND ON CONVENTION No.
119 GUARDING OF MACHINERY, 1963,
I AM ALSO PLEASED TO BE ABLE TO ANNOUNCE TODAY THAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAS NOW COMPLETED ALL THE NECESSARY PROCEDURES TO ENABLE
US TO RATIFY IMMEDIATELY THE CONVENTION RELATING TO THE STATUS
OF STATELESS PERSONS 1954, THE CONVENTION ON THE REDUCTION OF
STATELESSNESS 1961, THE PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE STATUS OF
REFUGEES 1966, AND THE PROTOCOL RELATING To REFUGEE SEAMEN 1973. 
-12-
AUSTRALIA ACCEDED TO THE CONVENTION ON THE STATUS
OF REFUGEES IN 1954. ON 18 APRIL THIS YEAR THE GOVERNMENT
RATIFIED THE 1957 HAGUE AGREEMENT RELATING To REFUGEE SEAMEN,
WHICH HAD COME INTO FORCE IN 1961. THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO TAKING
ACTION IN REGARD TO THE PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE 1960 UNESCO
CONVENTION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION IN EDUCATION WHICH AUSTRALIA
RATIFIED ON 29 NOVEMBER 1966. THE GOVERNMENT HAS INSTITUTED
ACTION TO DETERMINE WHETHER AUSTRALIA S HOULD ACCEDE TO THE 1962
PROTOCOL TO THIS CONVENTION, THE PRINCIPAL PURPOSE OF WHICH IS TO
ESTABLISH MACHINERY TO DEAL WITH VIOLATIONS OF THE CONVENTION,
THE INTRODUCTION OF LEGISLATION AND THE RATIFICATION OF
UNITED NATIONS AND I. L. O. AND UNESCO CONVENTIONS HAS BEEN
ACCOMPANIED BY VIGOROUS GOVERNMENT ACTION IN OTHER FIELDS
AFFECTING THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF EVERYONE WHO LIVES IN AUSTRALIA,
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ACTIVE IN PROMOTING EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN AND IN IMPROVING THEIR
CONDITIONS OF WORK. IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET STANDARDS FOR OTHER EMPLOYERS TO FOLLOW, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE PUBLIC SERVICE PROVIDES EQUAL PAY FOR WOMEN AND HAS RECENTLY
EXTENDED THE PROVISIONS FOR MATERNITY LEAVE TO 12 WEEKS PAID
LEAVE. TO ENABLE WOMEN TO PURSUE THEIR CAREERS IN A CONTINUOUS
FASHION AND MAKE A GREATER CONTRIBUTION TO THE LABOUR FORCE,
THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD IS CURRENTLY EXAMINING ASPECTS OF PARTTIME
EMPLOYMENT IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE. 
-13-
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT IN THE AREA OF WOMEN'S
EMPLOYMENT INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING MEASURES:
SUCCESSFUL INTERVENTION IN DECEMBER 1972 IN
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION'TO HAVE ESTABLISHED
THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE,
CONSULTATIONS WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE LED TO MOST
STATES AGREEING TO THIS PRINCIPLE.
THE PROVISION OF TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN
WISHING TO ENTER OR RE-ENTER THE LABOUR FORCE AFTER
A PERIOD OF DOMESTIC RESPONSIBILITY. THIS IS'PROVIDED
UNDER THE EMPLOYMENT TRAINING SCHEME FOR WOMEN
ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR.
THE RANGE OF BENEFITS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SCHEME
IS CURRENTLY BEING EXAMINED WITH A VIEW TO
FACILITATING FURTHER THE ENTRY OF WOMEN TO THE
LABOUR FORCE AND IMPROVING THFIR EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES1 PROVISION FOR ALLEGATIONS OF DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT ON THE GROUNDS OF SEX. TO BE INVESTIGATED
THROUGH THE SETTING UP OF COMMITTEES ON DISCRIMINATION
IN EMPLOYMENT AND OCCUPATION, 
-1LV
THROUGH ITS IMMIGRATION PROGRAM, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
ACTED TO REMOVE ANY SUGGESTION OF DISCRIMINATION ON GROUNDS
OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONALITY.
UNDER THE REVISED POLICY, ALL PEOPLE WHO CAN MEET
SELECTION CRITERIA ARE ELIGIBLE EQUALLY FOR SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA.
THE MAIN EMPHASIS OF THE PROGRAM IS NOW ON FAMILY ' REUNION AND
THE NATIONAL NEED. AUSTRALIA'S CITIZENSHIP LEGISLATION HAS
BEEN AMENDED SO THAT IT NOW APPLIES WITHOUT DISCRIMINATION TO
PEOPLE FROM ALL COUNTRIES. VISITOR VISA REQUIREMENT S ALSO HAVE
BEEN STREAMLINED TO PROMOTE INTERCHANGE AND GOODWILL BETWEEN
AUSTRALIA AND OTHER COUNTRIES. 1A NATIONAL COMMUNITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE AND TASK FORCES IN THE STATES HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED
TO ENQUIRE INTO ALL ASPECTS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS.
IN THE LIGHT OF THESE AND OTHER ENQUIRIES, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
CONTINUE TO TAKE WHATEVER ACTION IS NECESSARY TO END
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
IN THE SHORT SPACE OF TWELVE MONTHS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
TRANSFORMED AUSTRALIA'S INTERNATIONAL REPUTATION SO THAT OUR,
COUNTRY HAS ONCE AGAIN ASSUMED ITS RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE VANGUARD
OF COUNTRIES PROMOTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND IN INSISTING ON THE HIGHEST
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS IN. EMPLOYMENT AND IN INDUSTRY. My
COLLEAGUES IN THE MINISTRY HAVE CO-OPERATED WITH ENTHUSIASM AND
IMAGINATION TO HELP ME MAKE 1973 THE MOST PRODUCTIVE YEAR OF
ACHIEVEMENT WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS EVER HAD IN THESE VITAL FIELDS.
WE HAVE DEMONSTRATED OUR SINCERITY IN FULFILLING OUR COMMITMENTS
TO BRING ABOUT GREAT IMPROVEMENTS IN THE BASIC RIGHTS OF
AUSTRALIANS. 
THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO FACED SQUARELY THE FUNDAMENTAL
ISSUE OF MATCHING THE POLICIES AND ACTIONS WE ADOPT AT HOME
WITH FHOSE WE PURSUE ABROAD$
WE HAVE SHOWN BY THE STAND WE HAVE TAKEN, PARTICULARLY
IN THE UNITED NATIONS, THAT AUSTRALIA'S POLICIES ARE FIRMLY
BASED ON HUMANITARIAN PRINCIPLES OF RACIAL EQUALITY, MUTUAL
RESPECT AND THE ELIMINATION OF THE EVILS OF POVERTY,. ILLITERACY,
DISCRIMINATION AND COLONIALISM.
AL'STRALIA PAYS TRIBUTE TODAY TO THE CONTINUING CONTRIBUTION
OF THE LNII. ED NATIONS IN PROMOTING UNIVERSAL RESPECT FOR, AND
OBSERVANCE OF, FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS AND HUMAN RIGHTS,
ON 20 APRIL 1972 IN A DEBATE IN THE HOUSE ON RACIAL
PREJUDICE AND VIOLENCE I SAID THAT IN 1968, HUMAN RIGHTS YEAR,
AND IN 1971, THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR ACTION TO COMBAT
I\ ACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, THE UNITED NATIONS QUOTED THE
CONVENTIONS WHICH AUSTRALIA HAD NOT IMPLEMENTED. ON THAT
OCCASION I OBSERVED THAT WE HAD NOT IMPROVED OUR RECORD. BY
OUR ACTIONS THIS YEAR THE GOVERNMENT HAS ENSURED THAT AUSTRALIA'S
NATIONAL IMAGE WILL NEVER AGAIN BE AFFRONTED BY A POOR RECORD
OF ACHIEVEMENT IN GIVING EFFECT TO INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
TREATIES, 
-16-
I HOPE I MAY BE. FORGIVEN FOR CONCLUDING ON A PERSONAL
NOTE BY RECALLING THAT MY FATHER', H. FE, WHITLAM, CONTRIBUTED
TO THE WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS IN'THE HUMAN RIGHTS FIELD
AS AUSTRALIA'S REPRESENTATIVE AT THE 6TH SESSION OF THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION IN 1950 AND AT THE 10TH SESSION IN 1954,
HE ALSO ACTED AS A CONSULTANT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEYGENERAL
FOR SEVERAL YEARS ON HUMAN RIGHTS MATTERS, WHEN HE
DELIVERED THE FIRST SIR ROBERT GARRAN ORATION IN 1959, HE
REFERRED TO THE GENERAL OBLIGATION AND RESPONSIBILITY OF
AUSTRALIA " TO SHARE IN THE TASK OF SECURING HIGHER STANDARDS
AND BETTER LIVING CONDITIONS, NOT ALONE FOR HER PEOPLE, BUT FOR
PEOPLE IN OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD" HE SAID:
" THE FOUNDATION FOR THAT OBLIGATION AND RESPONSIBILITY
WAS LAID WHEN, IN THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS,. AUSTRALIA,
IN COMPANY WITH OTHER NATIONS, REAFFIRMED HER FAITH IN THE
DIGNITY AND WORTH OF THE HUMAN PERSON AND EXPRESSED HER
DETERMINATION TO PROMOTE SOCIAL PROGPESS AND BETTER
STANDARDS OF LIFE IN LARGER FREEDOM, AND LATER, WHEN SHE
SUBSCRIBED TO THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS,
ARTICLE 1 OF WHICH SETS FORTH THAT ALL-HUMAN BEINGS ARE
FREE AND EQUALIN DIGNITY AND RIGHTS, THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED
WITH REASON AND CONSCIENCE AND SHOULD ACT TOWARDS ONE
ANOTHER IN A SPIRIT OF BROTHERHOOD, I" 



NOTES FOR A SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT A D
CIVIC LUNCH CASINO-MONDAY 14 JANUARY 1974
I WOULD LIKE TO THANK MR. ANTHONY FOR'INTRODUCING
ME. I HAVE OBSERVED WITH INTEREST IN THE LAST WEERKTHE MOVES
FOR HIS PARTY TO MERGE WITH ANOTHER SMALLER GROUP INTO WHAT
IS BEING TERMED THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE. THESE MOVES HAVE THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF SEEING THE SECOND NATIONAL ALLIANCE . TO COME
ON TO THE POLITICAL SCENE IN AUSTRALIA. ' THOSE TWO WORDS COULD
EASILY HAVE BEEN USED TO DESCRIBE THE LABOR PARTY FOR MANY
YEARS, FOR THE LABOR PARTY HAS BEEN THE ONLY POLITICAL
ORGANISATION IN AUSTRALIA WHICH CAN TRULY CLAIM TO REPRESENT
AN ALLIANCE OF ALL OUR NATIONAL INTERESTS. iR
IT IS NOT A SECTION!_-PARTY. IT HAS ALWAYS
" PRESEiTED PEOPLE THROUG'Ij. V OUR NATION AND NOT JUST THOSE
' HO LIVE IN PART OF If. IT IS NEITHER A CITY PARTY ALONE NOR
' IRRAL PARTY ALONE, IT . EPF.: CLNTS BOTH SECTIONS OF OUR
0 COUNTRY, NOR IS IT SIMPLY A WORKING-CLASS PARTY, TO BE SURE
' TS FOUNDATIONS LIE IN THE NEEDS OF WORKING MEN AND WE WILL
S ALWAYS BE DEDICATED TO PRESERVING THEIR INTERESTS, BUT IT iS
.' IJST AS MUCH CONCERNED WITH THE NEEDS OF OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
CO23IMUNITY, . I MAKE THIS POINT BECAUSE I FEEL THERE HAS BEEN SOME
-! DENCY, INEVITABLY PROMOTED BY OUR OPPONENTS, TO BRAND THE
) R PARTY AS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY,. THE TRUTH IS WE ARE
"' Di \ TED TO THE CREATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SELF-SUFFICIENT,
: OS'pROUS AND FFcir; ' ST iNiiDS ' RIES
4' ' l l 
I S. 0' A
TO ACHIEVE. THIS AIM WE ARE STRIVING TO IMPROVE THE DOMESTIC
MARKET FOR. PRIMARY PRODUCE, TO CONSOLIDATE EXISTING EXPORT
S MARKETS AND TO CREATE NEW MARKETS. ' I BELIEVE THAT THE LAST
. YEAR HAS. UNDOUBTEDLY BEEN A SUCCESSFUL ONE IN THOSE TERMS.
. CONTRARY-TO WHAT THE PREACHERS OFTHE RURAL-DOOMSDAY MIGHT.
S SAY, PRIMARY INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA GENERALLY IS EXTREMELY
BUOYANT. AT PRESENT. LET US LOOK FOR EVIDENCE OF THIS.. ASSERTION
THE. FIGURES FOR FARM INCOME IN AUSTRALIA. IN THE THREE
YEARS ENDED 1969/ 70 . FARM INCOME AVERAGED ABOUT $ 1,050 M,
" A YEAR. . THE ONSET OF DROUGHT AND DECLINING PRICES CAUSED
FARM INCOME TO DROP TO $ 885 M. IN 1970/ 71 AND MANY PRODUCERS
FACED SERIOUS FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES. THOSE PROBLEMS HAVE
BY AND LARGE BEEN COMPLETELY REVERSED AND THE CURRENT ESTIMATE
i! FARM INCOME FOR 1973/ 74 IS $ 2,885 M. MORE THAN THREE TIMES
AS GREPT AS IN 1970/ 71 AND WELL OVER DOUBLE THE AVERAGE INCOME
FOR THE THREE YEARS BEFORE THEN.
A SIMILAR PATTERN OF IMPROVEMENT CAN BE SEEN BY
EXAMINING THE'FIGURES FOR EXPORTS OF RURAL ORIGIN, IN 1971/ 72
AUSTRALIA EARNED $ 2,419.3 M. FROM THESE EXPORTS. IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT IN 1973/ 74 THEY WILL BE WORTH .$ 3874.4 M.
A VERY HEALTHY IMPROVEMENT. INDEED.
ONE OF THE INDUSTRIES WHICH HAS BENEFITED PARTICULARLY
' OM THE RESURGENCE OF OUR RURAL AREAS IS THE MEAT INDUSTRY, WHICH
SATTRACTING INCREASING SUPPORT IN THIS, AREA. PRODUCTION OF
BEEF AND VEAL HAS GROWN AND EXPORTS HAVE ALSO INCREASED QUITE
,; 1AMitTICALLY. AUSTRALIA EXPORTED 339,000 TONNES OF BEEF AND
VEAL IN 1970/ 71'. THIS GREW TO 585,000 TONNES IN 1972/ 73 AND
CURRENT ESTIMATES ARE THAT WE WILL EXPORT 658,000 TONNES IN 
-3-
1973/ 74 ALMOST A DOUBLING OF OUR EXPORT MARKET-IN THREE
YEARS. ONE-INDUSTRY OF, CONCERN TO THE PEOPLE OF THIS
AREA THE DAIRY INDUSTRY-HAS FACED CONTINUING PROBLEMS$
I AM AWARE* THAT. OUR DECISION TO PHASE OUT THE DAIRY BOUNTY
HAS AROUSED CRITICISM AMONG DAIRYING INTERESTS. HOWEVER,
I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THIS DECISION IS IN-LINE WITH THE
GOVERNMENT'S CONVICTION THAT THE EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC
FUNDS SHOULD BE PURPOSEFUL. IN OUR VIEW THE DAIRY BOUNTY
HAD CEASED TO BE PURPOSEFUL. DESPITE THE OUTLAY OF $ 770 M.
OVER THE YEARS THE BOUNTY HAD NOT CONTRIBUTED TO SOLVING
THE INDUSTRY'S MAJOR PROBLEM THAT OF ADJUSTING FARM
PRODUCTION TO REALISTIC LOCAL. AND OVERSEAS MARKET DEMAND.
AS A WT.'! RE MEASURE THE BOUNTY PROVED INEFFECTIVE BECAUSE
IE BULI CF -I , ENT TO THE LARGER AND WEALTHIER PRODUCERS
WHO NEEDED IT LEAST, IT HAD ALSO BECOME BUILT INTO THE
PRICE OF LAND AND OTHER DA! RY INPUTS AND-ADDED TO PRODUCTION
COSTS. EVEN BEFORE THE BUDGET, THE DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE
DAIRYING DIVISION OF THE VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
HAD ARGUED THAT ANY BENEFITS FARMERS HAD RECEIVED FROM THE
D ONTY HAD LONG BEEN CANCELLED OUT BY UNREALISTIC LAND
PRICES AND OTHER CAPITAL GAINS. 4/
a 
WE HAVE DECIDED TO GET AWAY FROM AN OPEN-ENDED
COMMITMENT. TO THE BOUNTY, WHICH IS LEAVING THE FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEMS OF THE INDUSTRY UNSOLVED4 AND TO PROVIDE MONEY TO
STABILISE THE INDUSTRY SO THAT IT CAN STAND ON ITS OWN
FEET. WE WILL DO THIS BY INDUSTRY ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE
AND WE HAVE UNDERTAKEN TO DEVELOP, ADJUSTMENT. PROPOSALS IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE INDUSTRY. EXTENSIVE CONSULTATION
HAS GONE ON ALMOST CONTINUOUSLY SINCE AUGUST AND OFFICERS
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY HAVE VISITED'ABOUT
FORTY GROUPS IN ALL STATES INCLUDING THE NORTH COAST REGION.
THEY HAVE CONSULTED, AMONG OTHERS, THE CASINO CO-OPERATIVE
DAIRY SOCIETY LIMITED, NORCO CO-OPERATIVE LIMITED, THE
KYOGLE RURAL RE-CONSTRUCTION COMMITTEE, . THE NEW SOUTH WALES.
) AIRY FARMERS ASSOCIATION AND THE NEW SOUTH WALES DAIRY
, io; J ;:--iOlTY. SIMULTi,; LEOUSLY MANY WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS
h; AVE BEEi ' rlADE AND THE 0', O:: OMf OF ALL OF THIS IS THAT NEARLY
.100 SEPARATE , SUGGES: IOiS HAVE COME FROM'INDUSTRY SOURCES ANi;
STATE AIITHORITIES. ' TEY COVER THE POSSIBLE BROADENIiG OF
THE EXISTING-MARGiNAL DAIRY FARM RE-CONSTRUCTION SCHEME AND
A HUiMBER OF PROPOSALS FOR ACTION AT BOTH FARM AND FACTORY
LEVEL. THE DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS NOW GIVING TOP
" RTORITY TO ANALYSING AND ASSESSING THE'MERITS OF THESE
PROPOSALS AND THE POSSIBLE COSTS: IT iS DOING THIS IN THE
. GHT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S WISH THAT ADJUSTMENT EXPENDITURE
IVE A POSITIVE RESULT IN THE INTERESTS OF THE : INDUSThRY 
'-I-Tg1irtEa rn-A n. r N 7PT FO
OF THE DAIRY INDUSTRY, rO3R 2-XAMkuL,, W F
~%~ OTONNES FOR 19y/ 3// 4.* J OULD ADD THA1T
* WAS MADE BEFORF TIM C'f
OF CHEDDAR CHEESE FROMt AUSTRALIA IN THE FIRST TI1RFr
I.-. P
i I N% GIR EfY ) I E* 1Nw. MAY . r 0
* BuslNV.---SmAN -IN NOVEMBER: T-t, Fn! 2. Fij.
Ml. KEP LiNDEE'.; Vl 311
N l Al. A N 1 PROMOTE'PROPOSALS FOR T-HE GUIDANCE AND" ASSISTMJCF
OF SMALL BUSINESS. Ai-ANOTHER LEVEL THEL PRsE ~ OEN~. I
* IRST 1To TAkE. POSI TIVE AND DECISIVE., ACT. ION -TO PROMOTE
DECENTRAL I-SAT ION IN AUSTRALIA. PLAN'MI Ni FOR THE CriA. 6
OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE AT ALBURY-WODONGI I S W'DY
ADVANCED, AND WE AIMTO MAKEJ~ HIS THE PROTOTYPE FOR OTHER
GROWH CNTRs. * DECENTRALISATIO N HAS LONG -TREU E AOt
X N THIS COUNTRY4 1973 SAtl 14. GINNIIG OF TPE 7-1RST
REALLY CONCRETE PROPOSALS TO D-SUVILIhING ABOUT IT. 116/ 
-6-
THE POINT I HAVE TRIED TO STRESS IN MY REMARKS
SO FAR IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AS ANY GOVERNMENT
MUST, RECOGNISES THE VITAL IMPORYANCE OF OUR RURAL AREAS
FOR THE WHOLE NATION. IN KEEPING WITH THIS RECOGNITION,
THE GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED IN DECEMBER THAT IT WOULD HOLD AN
INQUIRY INTO ALL ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY IN AUSTRALIA, THE
INOIJIRY, TO BE CONDUCTED BY A WORKING GROUP, WILL RESULT IN
THE FIRST GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED REPORT ON OVERALL RURAL
POLICYISINCE THE PUBLICATION OF " AGRICUILTURAL PRODUCTION:
AIMS AND POLICIES" BYTHE FORMER DEPARTMENT'OF COMMERCE AND
AGRICULTURE IN 1952,0 OVER 20 YEARS AGO. A MAJOR BASIS FOR
THE INQUIRY IS THE GOVERNMENT'S VIEW THAT TH'ERE IS NO PLACE
IN THE ECONOMY FOR A RURAL POLICY THAT IS NOT,-BOTH EQLJITAI3LE,
FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS AND ECONOMICALLY' SOHIIND
IN ANNOUNCING THE INQUIRY, THE MINISTER FOR
PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR 107! ' QIFflT, ANV; V\ X THF
GOVERNMENT WISHES TO AVOID AD HOC DECIINS THAT MIGHT
APPEAR TO SOME TO BE POL41TICALLY ATTRCTIV.. AT THE TIME,.
BUT WHICH IN FACT MIGHT OFF7 NO L. ONG WmR Sr-CUtRXT\' OR
REAL BENEFITS TO -THE GENIJINE *. PR. I. MARY. PRODUCER.. THE
GO~ li. NI FEflriD A BASIS mTPRY ON 1V ! C1 TO
rOFMULAYF Fcop. jyc'iCAlA' soig.!) Ndl A. ovv OIUTAi_
AlSO S! WI A NFF-D Flflr A PITPAI, fl', 7L'\ 7 P7nO I : T THAT
ANT) I f, 1, f jCfT ' i 7 7YA1NT'. CO% UN I YY ARE
OF MANY' DID 1PEPNfl( i1?: O ' I Ti! PfIMA'Y 1" DUSTRIES, ., 71 
* THE WORKE'" G GRO;' P VILL DRiu r, ' FOR CONS! flERATIO 1^ V TL: E
CG* O " E~ iqMFN!, A " CRE Oiv, iIP OL 1CY, IN.*: ORPORAJINU
ASPECTS FRO . M PRE-NT AuSTRALJAIJ GO % fRNMET. P% LI CIES SUCH
AA~ 3 SKLECTIVF ) PEC -' TRAi. IS -TTh) N. ( hSRY
RECO14STRUCTION AND LONG-' TERM INTe~ illTIONAL COiWM( DITY
AGR--t-MENTS,-WWI A? SO~ ATTE1FT ' 1' 0 IN-ERi' THESE A 4D
OTH -R fJkCTORS INTO A SF-f OF PRiINCIPL5 -jPON WHIC~ l FUTUr
v,' ROLICiE-q., C0ULD BE BUILT. EEXPECT TO PUBLISH THE
R A P E R BY GOVERNM-FT, AUTt-QRIT V BtLI9 liTHLUT FORlAl-
V APP16' IN THAT FORMJ IT WOULD B; DEBATE, IN' CABINET,
I m~. LAMY ANI) IN THE COM1L'IRT" V CE4AI
wM/ VTICtPiARLY V-1 TiE PURAL SECTOR, IHLSE .1DEBATES WILL
GOVERNMENrT* o CREATE A MORE VIABLE RURAL
' LC7' OR " IN THE AUSTRALAN .' 1CONONY, WE HJPE TO R~ ECEIVETHE
W'UTK1NG GRCUP S REPO'? 1 L. Y
34 I
3.3 ATHE OTHER~ SUBJIECr h HL I WIULL ! LIKL 70 TALK
A 0U 1 TO DA Y 13" FS'. ECALLV A PRuK: IATE FCR A LUN tGIVEN
BY APJUOICIPAL COUNCIL -THAT ISo IE ' oOVLRNMENT S PLANS
FOR JNjEC'TYNG NEW LIFE INTO, AND CREATING NE4~ POSSIBILITIES
FOftLdtAL GOV NMEA'T IN AUSTRALIA, I HAVE TALKED FOR
SOME. YEARS ABOUT THE NEED FOR PROPER RECOGNITION TO BE
GL. YdJTO, THE ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IT IS THE ARM
OF GOYCRNMENT. WHICH IS CLOSEST TO PEOPLE AND WHICH AFFECTS
SQMANY ASPECTS OF THEIR DAILY LIVES, 9 8 
i GAVE il SPECH ENTXTLED " IHE FmU: eR
AlUSTRALIAN-FEDERALISM" IN NOVEMAER .1. AND-I t! i.;
HAI I S'JTO SAY:
1ie Fil'TURE oF. AUSTRALIANJIEDERALISM
DEPENDSFA MORE UPON MURCtA~ 1S~~
. UPON, THE COMMONWEALTH-wR. 1H~ S'TATES.
~ FEDERALISM -ISTHREATENED-NOT', Y THE.
DRIFTlOF . POW'E FROM STATE CAPITALS TO
CANBERRA BUT BY THE' STATES IMPOSING-UPON.
MUNICIPALITIES FUNCTIONS WHICH.' ARE BPYOND.
THEIR MEAS. IT iS'NOT THE -C6MOWELH.
BUT THE S) TATES WHICH MUST RESIST OR FEAR'
. A REASSESSMENT OF FUNCTIONS -IN OUR.
FEDEPR kT~* No FOR THE STATES TREAT
lJN CI PA,. I T IES E VFc MOPE FRUSALLY THAN
K O.-I LOi E . BL K~ 1" -0
. N\ PIrJT&gt; YNTO A. PPL. ICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE BY RE61 ONAL.
' C A KFN Eb LAl fA.( l
I L b U ) iATL 3 UNiDE SEC
0o . 1' T-T lJD THE
LOCA GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS CONCERN't'iD. 
-9-
IT IS HOPED THAT AmPLICATIINS BY REGIONAL ORGA~ i'qSA* TIChs
WILL BEGIN 10 BE RECE! VED AND CONSIDERED EARLY THIS YEAR.
ADDITIONALLY, UmWE A THE, AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN,
THr-RE W. dLL BE AVAIABLE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUvHORITIES
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO ENABLE THEM MORE EFFECTIVELY TO
PROVIDE WELFARE AND HEALTH SERVICES TO THEIR COMMUNITIESS
THESE ACTIOJS DIRECTED TO BENEFIT LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE
BEEN TAKEN ALONGSIDE A RANGE OF OTHER MEASURES DESIGNED
TG " EMEDY) IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIESj SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES WHICH HAVE EXISTED IN
PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES. NEW OR ENLARGED
5 OUI P BUDGET FCR 1973/ 714, FOR EDUCATION.
C K2; N? SEWERAGE SERVTCES
.' NT . A* ENMt ' EME NT , ' PPA ' ROTN IT CENP. FES ARE
L. I&gt; j~ C CF OCP'-3V: N
o*! N FLUNC-T16.4S I HA tIC'f
r&gt; fi~ i... E c ~ 0T7. 0 W 2 ARE P~) C
-H I S YEAR, TO EMPUVER ' HE IUJSTRALIAN GOVERIm rcr LC'
f' 3NL: I L AND AT SAME TICI~
LnAiE ilTT ;' ro; I 2 TA C JNAW ASSISTANCE DIRECT ' a'X'
LOCAL q-0 
AT PRESENT, THE LOCAL. GOVERNMENT'AUTHORITIES RAISE
LOAN FUNDS '~ iTHEMSELVES -SUBJECT TO A'." GENTLEMEN's AGREEMENT
R~ EACHED BETWEEN.' THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATES IN 1936-or
. THEY . OBTAIN LOAN FUNDS FROM"' THE STATES.-UNDER THIS SYSTEM,
THEIR INDEBTEDNES. S HAS WORSENED DRAMATICALLY OVER THE YFAIR%
IN! JUNE 1947, THE TOTAL OUTSTANDING DEBT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES WAS ABOUT 140 MILLION DOLLARS. By JUNE 1971, THE
PEBT HAD RISEN TO 3730 MILLION DOLLARS MORE THAN 129 TIM1Fz-
AS GR2%-ATil AS THE DEBTB 24 YEARS EARLIER, THE RATE OF ! NICREASl-
OF THE TOTAL OUTSTANDING DEBT OF STATE GOV/ ERNMENTS IN THE SAME
PERIOD WAS ONLY HALF AS GREAT.
THE COST OF SERVICING THEIR BorROWE73 ALSO D~
HEAVIL. Y OKI THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHOTWi-S.-o'V . l
I F -L-' P77 P. A\ MENT. S DY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHlOR! TIE-V! ILL Not. BE
' VLN TO ABOUT .12 PER CENT OF THEIR REVENUESLL N 1-L:) E S T
rAVNTSPLUS CAPITAL REPAYMEN~ TS AMOUNTED TO OU 1
ii2LARS IN 1970/ 71 AND WERE EOUJX\ AI. 7-. T TO 00,1W7 Y LLLJ
OF REVENUES. THIS SITUATION COMES ABOUT IlM ASE OF A Fi\' NAI
AGREEMENT REACHED BETWEEN THE COMMvONWELTwH AND THE STATES IN
1927 AND DEVELOPED BY THE " GENTLEMEN'S AGREEMENT" NINE YEARS
LATER. TH EP E IS NO QIJ) E STiO 0T [ Tl7 ? 7 : 1 7
WERE BEING DECIDED UPON NOW THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAV'E
BEEN TREATED DIFFERENTLY. IT WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN IGNORED
AS 1T WA õ THEMI AND IT VIOULD CERTAINLY 11AVE BEEN GIVEN A PLACE
ON THE LOAN COUNCIl. WHICH LAtRGELY IDE-TERM* IES LOCAL GO\' ERM[ NT' s
LOAN--RA7S1116 ABILITY. .11/ 
If IS ABSURD THAT, WHILE ARfRANGEM, T-'. i[ r
LS1bLI. jjijFOR BORROWINGS BY STATE ( W0VERINMENTS fO BE UNEI) A~ r; I
i iERif 1EHAll-f 1CAL GOVE: RNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE LAkGELY -rV
l0 fEfND FOR THEMSELVES IN THE CAPITAL MARKETS. WITH THF
*' ILLTYAND SOPHISi ICATION OF-THFSE (. 1, ARKEIS,, THEY
ARE fiANDICAtPf'Eii AS BORROWERS. ITIS ONL-Y COMMONSENSE THAT
P JSTRALIAN GJOVERNMENIf WITH [ rs SUPERIOR CAPixCITY A
BORROI,. EkR, SHOULD UNDERTAKE BORROWINGS ON THEIR BEHALF.
DESPIT THEIR COMMONSENSE NATURE; I WAS REBUFFED
WHEN I PUT TWO NEW PROPOSALS TO REMEDY THIS SITUATION AT A
MEETiNu WITH Tki HEADS 6F 6G0vERNVhJIT OF THE STATE.', IN~ OufOBER.
SJG~ ECETHAT ELECTED LOCAL. GOVERNMENTS SHOULD HAVE BOTH
AvCrT(&gt; iJJ VOT7 J, T~ l. . T) 2N L ALi'~ 3 0 PROPOSED YHAT
-ftE AUS'TF
OF E-LL&gt;. 1* L-D L; V: j. i.( v. rNu'T il E MEL-TING WAS AB3ORTIVE. Ti
11-Oft ' 11-1S REI% r lWE rP'OU ~ rL. 1TC IM P'' E A1
VIE W1. 1. NOT BE Ii 1' G T i ;" FERTEN ID1111, T a
I ~ Ifdl CAI SV ST ENU i A4 -1 . 1 E : i~ J
a i v0. A: i~ L DINEL S AND THE1~ Si:, V. CI!, b'S If
1 L LV Z; . JV A1.
FOR THCOMMUNITrIES IT 5ERVES1 
Iii IS 13E(: OfES EXT RI hMF1 t. I 1-11" 1-4' AN~ ) 1 r
IN WHICH THE GoVERNMENT BEIJ. 1rVFS LO. f\ GMIFflMFT SHO1JMP WWIAl
K~ GROLE. INI THE NATION' S iI~ FY
ITS El FC( T1fl OFFIC1ILS AND) Pr-RN!\ NMENT OFFICFRS ARE CONSTANTLY
FMGAGFI)) IN iDhAL. IHGW UlIT OC1Al.. PnOrB IMS, THEY ARF IN A PFRFFCT 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO THE 46TH ANNUAL WESTERN AUSTRALIAN SUMMER SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA FRIDAY 18 JANUARY 1974
A SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH TO HEALTH
LAST MONDAY I WAS ABLE TO TELL A NATIONAL CONVENTION OF
TEACHERS OF MY SPECIAL SATISFACTION AT THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE FIELD OF EDUCATION IN THE LAST YEAR.
IDESCRIBED HOW IT HAD TAKEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS NEARLY 100-YEARS
TO ESTABLISH THE PRINCIPLE THAT EDUCATION IS A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
I OUTLINED HOW THE RESULT OF THE FAILURE TO ACCEPT THIS PRINCIPLE
HAD BEEN " ITO ENTRENCH PRIVILEGE AND WIDEN STILL FURTHER THE
INEQUALITIES'IN THE EDUCATION SYSTEM" THE MAJOR BATTLE OVER THIS
ISSUE WAS WON LAST YEAR WITH THE CREATION OF A NEW CHARTER FOR THE
CHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PROVISION OF THE ESSENTIAL FUNDS AND
MACHINERY TO IMPLEMENT IT.
THAT SPEECH COULD HAVE BEEN EASILY ENTITLED " A SOCIAL
SERVICE APPROACH To EDUCATION". FOR THE ESSENTIAL INGREDIENT OF A
SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH TO ANY ASPECT OF OUR SOCIETY MUST BE TO
OFFSET PRIVILEGE AND MINIMISE INEQUALITIES. IT MUST BE TO IDENTIFY
AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE AND DISABILITY AND STRIVE TO IMPROVE AND
REMEDY THEM. I AM PROUD OF THE IRREVOCABLE FIRST STEPS WE HAVE TAKEN
TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS IN EDUCATION. I AM CONFIDENT THAT WE CAN
PRESS ON SUCCESSFULLY WITH THE GREAT TASK THAT LIES AHEAD OF US.
v s e/ 2 
-b V
UNHAPPILY I CAi4NOT SPEAK TO YOU TODAY( ABOUT AuSTRALIA0S
HEALTH SYSTEM WITH THE SAME DEGREE OF PRIDE AND CONFIDENCE. WE CAN
BE PLEASED WITH THE PROGRESS THAT HAS BEEN POSSIBLE IN THE LAST YEAR.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE THE FIRST MOVES TO IMPROVE OUR
HOSPITALS AND OTHER HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES; THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH.-
DR EVERINGHAM, TOLD YOU OF THESE ADVANCES ON WEDNESDAY. WE AHAVE1
HOWEVER, BEEN THWARTED IN OUR ATTEMPTS TO ACHIEVZE SOME OF OUR MOST
IMPORTANT OBJECTIVES.
THE RESULT IS THAT THE PROVISION OF HEALT H'CARE IN AUSTRALIA
IS STILL CHARACTERISED BY THE ENTRENCHMENT OF* PRIVILEGE AND BY
INEQUALITY. Too MANY AUSTRALIANS MORE THAN A MRLLIONI IN FACT -HAVE
NO FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGAINST THE HIGH COST OF ILLNESS AND INJURY.
Too MANY AUSTRALIANS PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO LIVE AWAY FROM THE
CENTRES OF OUR MAJOR CITIES -HAVE INADEQUATE ACCESS TO HIGH QUALITY
HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL SERVICES. Too MANY AUSTRALIANS SUFFER FROM
A SYSTEM WHICH MAKES IT CHEAPER FOR A WEALTHY MAN TO INSURE H= IMSELF
AGAINST MEDICAL CHARGES THAN IT IS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT WEALTHY.
IHAVE JUST MENTIONED THAT MORE THAN ONE MILLION AUSTRALIANS
ARE UNPROTECTED AGAINST HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL CHARGES. OUR OPPONENTS
HAVE FREQUENTLY TRIED TO DENY THAT ESTIMATE. THEY HAVE MADE THEIR
DENIALS SO THAT THEY CAN PRETEND. THAT IT IS POSSIBLE TO OVERCOME THE
DEFICIENCIES OF OUR PRESENT HEALTH SYSTEM BY MINOR IMPROVEMENTS@
ON THE 8TH JANUARY THE AUSTRALIAm BUREAU OF STATISTICS A BODY WHOSE
OBJECTIVITY I PRESUME WOULD NOT BE CHALLENGED PUBLISHED A REPORT
ON A SURVEY WHICH GIVES THE LIE 1* O OUR OPPONENTS'I ASSERTIONS. a e3 
-3-
-THE BUREAU CONDUCTED A SURVEY WHICH COVERED ABOUT 30,000 DWELLINGS
IN ALL STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY TO DETERMINE HOW MANY PEOPLE AGED 15 AND OVER WERE COVERED
BY HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEMES THAT IS
PEOPLE COVERED EITHER BY CONTRIBUTQRY HEALTH FUNDS OR B. Y NONCONTRIBUTORY
SCHEMES, INCLUDING THE PENSIONER MEDICAL SERVICE, FREE
COVER OF PERSONS ON UNEMPLOYMENT OR SICKNESS BENEFITS AND THE LIKE.
THE SURVEY DID NOT INCLUDE SERVICEMEN BECAUSE OF THE FREE HEALTH
SERVICES THAT ARE PROVIDED'FOR-THEM.
THE REPORT SHOWED THAT ONLY 86.5 PER CENT OF THE PEOPLE
SURVEYED WERE COVERED BY AN ASSISTANCE SCHEME. IN OTHER* WORDSi.
13.5 PER CENT OF THESE AUSTRALIANS WERE UNPROTECTED. EVEN ALLOWI1NG
FOR THE PARTIAL PROTECTION AFFORDED TO QUEENSLANDERS BY THE FREE
PUBLIC HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN THAT STATE, MORE THAN 10 PER CENT OF THESE
AUSTRALIANS WERE DEVOID OF HEALTH PAYMENT COVERAGE. To USE OBSOLUTE
FIGURES, THE REPORT ESTIMATES THAT 1.225,000 AUSTRALIANS AGED
AND OVER WERE NOT PROTECTED. IF WE BEAR IN MIND THAT NEARLY
PER CENT OF AUSTRALIANS ARE AGED UNDER 15, WE-CAN CONFIDENTLY
ESTIMATE THAT WELL OVER 1h MILLION AUSTRALIANS ARE NOT COVERED FOR
THE COST OF HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL TREATMENT. 
-4-
WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE? THE BUREAU'S REPORT CONTAINS FIGURES
WHICH THROW UP SOME INTERESTING ANSWERS TO THIS QUESTION, MIGRANTS
HAVE LESS PROTECTION THAN PEOPLE BORN IN AUSTRALIA, AND AMONG
MIGRANTS, THE WORST OFF ARE THOSE WHO HAVE NOT * BEEN IN AUSTRALIA
FOR VERY LONG; AND SOME MIGRANT GROUPS FARE LESS WELL THAN OTHERS,
THE FIGURES ALSO INDICATE A DISPARITY BETWEEN INCOME GROUPS; LOW
INCOME EARNERS ARE LESS LIKELY TO BE PROTECTED THAN THE WEALTHY,
IN OTHER WORDS, THE CLASSIC PATTERN OF INEQUALITY AND. ENTRENCHEMENT
OF PRIVILEGE WHICH ANY SOCIAL SECURITY APPROACH MUST CONTEND WITH
IS TO BE FOUND IN OUR HEALTH SYSTEM,
SOME OF THE FIGURES THAT INDICATE THESE CONCLUSIONS ARE
WORTH QUOTING. ONLY 83,3 PER CENT OF PEOPLE BORN OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA
WERE COVERED, COMAPRED WITH 87,6 PER CENT OF THOSE BORN IN
AUSTRALIA, OF PEOPLE WHO ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA BETWEEN JANUARY 1971
AND AUGUST 1972, WHEN THE SURVEY WAS CONDUCTED, ONLY 68 PER CENT
WERE COVERED, OF THOSE WHO ARRIVED BETWEEN 1967 AND 1970 THE FIGURE
IS 77,2 PER CENT, MORE THAN 53,000 GREEK MIGRANTS OR 37.5 PER CENT
WERE UNPROTECTED: ABOUT 52,000 ITALIAN MIGRANTS OR 19.1 PER CENT
WERE WITHOUT COVERAGE, IF A GREEK MIGRANT ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA
BETWEEN 1967 AND 1970 THERE WAS ONLY A 1O PER CENT CHANCE THAT HE
HAD BENEFITED FROM HEALTH EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEME, 
NOW LET US TURN TO THE DISADVANTAGES BETWEEN VA-,, 6US ! NCOME
GROUPS. THE REPORT ESTIMATES THAT 92.4 PER CENT OF PROFESSIONAL,
TECHNICAL AND RELATED WORKERS AND 91.5 PER CENT. OF ADMINISTRATIVEO
EXECUTIVE AND MANAGERIAL WORKERS BENEFITED FROM ASSISTANCE SCHEMES.
IN CONTRAST, THESE BENEFITS APPLY-' TO ONLY 68.7 PER CENT OF SOME
GROUPS OF LABOURERS, 78.7 PER CENT OF OTHER GROUPS OF LABOURERS1
TRADESMEN, AND PRODUCTION PROCESS WORKERS, 7717 PER CENT Or-CONSTRUCTION
WORKERS AND 81.5 PER CENT OF MINERS, QUARRYMEN AND RELATED WORKERSI
PEOPLE IN RURAL INDUSTRIES ALSO SUFFER BY COMPARISON WITH OTHER
AUSTRALIANS; ONLY 82.9 PER CENT OF FARMERS, FISHERMEN, TIMBER
GETTERS AND THE LIKE ARE PROTECTED.
IT IS ABSURD THAT IN A COUNTRY AS WEALTHY AS OURS
DISCRIMINATION OF THIS KIND.-AGAINST NEW ARRIVALS'AND LOW INCOME
EARNERS SHOULD EXIST. THOMAS JEFFERSON SAID IN 1787 THAT " WITHOUT
HEALTH THERE IS NO HAPPINESS. AN ATTENTION TO HEAL-7H, THEN, SHOULD
TAKE THE PLACE OF EVERY OTHER PROJECT" IT SEEMS THAT AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO CONDONE A GREATER MEASURE OF
UNHAPPINESS AMONG OUR DISADVANTAGED THAN AMONG THOSE WHO DERIVE* SO
MANY OTHER BENEFITS FROM OUR SOCIETY$
AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE SYSTEM IS
CLEARLY TO BLAME FOR THIS SITUATION. DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE ARE
DISCOURAGED FROM BELONGING TO PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS BECAUSE
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THEM ARE IN NO WAY RELATED TO A PERSON IS ABILITY
TO PAY; CONTRIBUTIONS INVOLVE FLAT RATES OF PAYMENT. IN FACT, THERE
IS DISCRIMINATION IN REVERSE BECAUSE OF OUR SYSTEM OF TAX DEDUCTIONS$
9 t s/ 6 
-6-
A TAX DEDUCTION IS WORTH MORE TO A HIGH-INCOME EARNER THAN TO
SOMEONE ON A LOWER INCOME. THUS, WHEN THE HIGH-INCOME EARNER CLAIMS
A TAX DEDUCTION FOR A HEALTH FUND CONTRIBUTION HE GAINS MORE FROM IT
THAN DOES A POORER MAN. THIS MEANS HIS HEALTH INSURANCE ENDS UP
BEING CHEAPER. FOR EXAMPLE, IN NEW SOUTH WALES A MAN WITH A WIFE
AND TWO CHILDREN ON ABOUT $ 70 A WEEK PAYS $ 81-A YEAR IN PUBLIC WARD
HOSPITAL COVERAGE AND MEDICAL INSURANCE AFTER TAX CONCESSIONS.
HOWEVE~ R, A MAN WITH THE SAME NUMBER OF DEPENDANTS ON $ 400 A WEEK
ONLY PAYS $ 54I FOR MEDICAL INSURANCE AND ER. LYAIE WARD COVERAGE AFTER
HE HAS GAINED HIS TAX CONCESSIONS0 AND TO REPEAT A. POINT I HAVE
OFTEN MADE IN THIS CONTEXT, IPAY LESS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE THAN
DOES MY CAR DRIVER.
TO ADD TO THIS INJUSTICE, A PERSON WHO CANNOT AFFORD
HEALTH INSURANCE OR WHO DOES NOT QUALIFY FOR ANY ASSISTANCE SCHEME
SUFFERS A FURTHER PENALTY. FOR THE COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDIES FOR MEDI. CAL
CHARGES ARE ONLY PAID TO PEOPLE WHO ARE INSURED AND, IF THE UNINSURlED
PERSON GOES INTO HOSPITAL, HE ATTRACTS A PALTRY SUBSIDY OF 80 CENTS
A DAY FOR HIS ACCOMMODATION. CLEARLY, PAST GOVERNMENT PRACTICE HAS
BEEN TO TRY TO FORCE PEOPLE INTO JOINING PRIVATE THE SO-CALLED
/ IVOLUNTARY" 1 HEALTH INSURANCE FUNDS WHETHER THEY FIND THE RATES
EXCESSIVE OR NOT. 17 
I THE PRESENT HEALTH SCHEME HAS OTHER SUBSTANTIAL DEFICIENCIES
APART FROM INJUSTICE AND INEQUALITY, IT HAS ONLY BEEN SAVED FROM
SERIOUS FINANCIAL TROUBLE BY MASSIVE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES. SUBSIDIES
FOR MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS ROSE FROM $ 80,000,000 IN 1969 TO
$ 200,000,000 IN 1972, IF WE LOOK AT TOTAL AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL COSTS,
WE FIND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAID FOR ABOUT 54 PER CENT
DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY ( THROUGH TAXATION) IN 1969, IN 1972-73 THE
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTED 68 PER CENT. ABOUT $ 203,000,000 WAS PAID
BY DIRECT SUBSIDY AND $ 61,000,000 AS TAXATION CONCESSIONS, THIS MEANS
THAT TWO DOLLARS IN EVERY THREE EARNED BY DOCTORS. COMES FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THE PRESENT SCHEME HAS ALSO BECOME UNNECESSARILY EXPENSIVE
AND WASTEFUL, LARGE SUMS OF MONEY ARE KEPT USELESSLY IDLE IN THE
RESERVE HOLDINGS OF THE PRIVATE FUNDS; IN 1971-72 THEY AMOUNTED TO
$ 124,000,000 OR THE EQUIVALENT OF 42 PER CENT OF THAT YEAR'S
CONTRIBUTIONS, THERE IS UNNECESSARY DUPLICATION OF SERVICES BECAUSE
OF THE EXISTENCE OF 81 MEDICAL AND' 90 HOSPITAL INSURANCE ORGANISATIONS
OPERATING THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, COMPETITION FOR MEMBERS, WASTEFUL
ADVERTISING AND COMMISSION RATES ALL CONTRIBUTE TO UNDULY HIGH
OPERATING COSTS FOR THESE FUNDS, AT PRESENT THESE COSTS ACCOUNT FOR
AN AVERAGE OF ABOUT 11 PER CENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS FOR ALL FUNDS AND
AN AVERAGE OF 15 PER CENT FOR MEDICAL FUNDS, 
-8-
THE FAILINGS OF AUSTRALIA' S HEALTH SYSTEM ARE NOT, OF COURSE,
CONFINED TO INSURANCE. GRAVE INADEQUACIES HAVE DEVELOPED IN THE
PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES. AGAIN WE FIND THE SPECTRE OF
INEQUALITY ARISES, FACILITIES HAVE NOT KEPT PACE WITH CHANGES IN
THE NATURE OF OUR SOCIETY, HOSPITALS, DOCTORS AND OTHER SERVICES
ARE SPREAD UNEVENLY AND UNFAIRLY, THERE IS * A TENDENCY FOR DOCTORS
TO LIVE IN MORE AFFLUENT SUBURBS BECAUSE OF THEIR FINANCIAL ABILITY
TO DO so, AND THERE HAS BEEN A TENDENCY FOR HOSPITALS TO BE
LOCATED NEAR WHERE DOCTORS LIVE AND PRACTICE. MY COLLEAGUE THE
MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY MR BILL HAYDEN, HAS POINTED OUT THAT
IN SYDNEY, FOR EXAMPLE, THE CITY'S SEVEN TEACHING HOSPITALS ARE
LOCATED WITHIN AN EIGHT-MILE RADIUS OF THE G. P. O. AND FIVE OF THEM
ARE WITHIN A FOUR-MILE RADIUS. YET THE GREAT MAJORITY OF SYDNEY'S
POPULATION LIVES A CONSIDERABLE DISTANCE OUTSIDE THESE PARAMETERS.
IT IS OBVI-OUSLY WRONG TO DEPRIVE MOST OF A CITY'S POPULATION OF
READY ACCESS TO THE BEST HOSPITAL FACILITIES.
THE MAJOR PROBLEM, HOWEVER, WHICH CONFRONTS US IN THIS
FIELD IS THE GROWING COST OF HEALTH SERVICES. AT PRESENT THEY COST
AUSTRALIA MORE THAN $ 2,000,000,000 OR ABOUT 5.3 PER CENT OF GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT. BUT THEIR COST IS INCREASING DRAMATICALLY WHEN
COMPARED WITH THE COST OF OTHER SERVICES. HEALTH SERVICES ARE
ENORMOUSLY DEMANDING IN TERMS OF MANPOWER. THE SORT OF LABOUR~ SAVINGS
THAT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE IN OTHER INDUSTRIES HAVE NOT BEEN ATTAINED.
16/ 9 
-9-
* FOR EXAMPLE, THE SELLING OF GROCERIES AND ALLIED COMMODITIES HAS
BEEN REVOLUTIONISED IN RECENT YEARS BY THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUPERMARKETS,
WHICH OVERALL ARE LESS DEMANDING OF LABOUR THAN THE TYPE OF STORES
THAT THEY HAVE TO A GREAT EXTENT REPLACED. THAT SORT OF MANPOWER
RATIONALISATION HAS NOT BEEN POSSIBLE WITH HEALTH SERVICES,
PARTICULARLY AS COMMUNITY EXPECTATIONS HAVE RISEN AND AS NEW AND
MORE COMPLICATED MEDICAL PROCEDURES HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED. THE RESULT
IS THAT IT HAS BEEN ESTIMATED THAT, AT THE PRESENT RATE, HEALTH
COSTS WILL DOUBLE EVERY FIVE OR SIX YEARS IN AUSTRALIA, ACCORDING
TO THIS ESTIMATE, OUR EXPENDITURE ON HEALTH SERVICES COULD BE MORE
THAN 12 PER CENT OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT BY THE YE* AR 2000 ONLY
26 YEARS FROM NOW. THAT IS, IF NOTHING IS DONE TO ENSURE GREATER
EFFICIENCY IN OUR HEALTH SPENDING.
ICAN DEMONSTRATE THE PROBLEM THAT CONFRONTS GOVERNMENTS
AND CITIZENS ALIKE BY ANALYSING THE CURRENT PLIGHT OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS HERE IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA. THE OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS IN THIS STATE IN 1974-75 ARE EXPECTED TO BE MORE THAN
DOUBLE THE COSTS IN 1970-71 WHEN THE LAST INCREASE IN FEES OCCURRED;
THEY ARE EXPECTED TO RISE FROM $ 46 MILLION TO NEARLY $ 95 MILLION.
THE SHARE OF THE COSTS THAT COMES FROM STATE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES IS
EXPECTED TO RISE IN THE SAME PERIOD FROM 59 PER CENT To 67 PER CENT.
THIS TREND CAN ONLY BE ARRESTED BY A LARGE INCREASE IN PUBLIC
HOSPITAL FEES OR BY GREATER ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
SIGNIFICANTLY GREATER ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD
FLOW FROM THE FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS UNDER OUR PROPOSED HEALTH
INSURANCE PROGRAM. OUR OPPONENTS IN THE SENATE, HOWEVER, WERE ABLE
TO USE THEIR NUMBERS IN DECEMBER TO HINDER THIS HAPPENING. 
THERE CAN BE NO QUESTION THAT TWO THINGS NEED TO HAPPEN
TO CONTROL THESE TRENDS AND ACHIEVE THE GREATER EFFICIENCY AND GREATER
EQUALITY THAT ARE NEEDED IN THE PROVISION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN
AUSTRALI'A. WE MUST ACCEPT THE NEED FOR NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR
HEALTH, AS IN EDUCATION, AND WE -MUST OVERHAUL OUR HEALTH INSURANCE
SCHEME. THE HISTORY OF MOVES TOWARDS NATI'ONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN
HEALTH IS A RECENT ONE. AN AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION, CARRIED
BY REFERENDUM IN 1946, GAVE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THE POWER TO
PROVIDE FOR / IPHARMACEUTICAL, SICKNESS AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS, ( AND)
MEDICAL AND DENTAL SERVICES . HOWEVER, SINCE THEN THE BENEFITS OF
COMMONWEALTH INVOLVEMENT HAVE LARGELY BEEN FELT IN THE AREA OF MEDICAL
AND PHARMACEUTICAL COSTS. THE MEDICAL BENEFIT SCHEME STARTED IN
19C53 AND I HAVE ALREADY POINTED OUT HOW COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDIES
UNDER IT HAVE GROWN DRAMATICALLY, IN NO SMALL PART DUE TO ITS
INEFFICIENCIES. A PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS ACT WAS PASSED BY THE
NATIONAL PARLIAMENT IN 1947. THIS ACT HAD LITTLE SUCCESS AND WAS
SUBSEQUENTLY AMENDED UNTIL THE INTRODUCTION OF THE PRESENT FORM OF
THE PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS SCHEME UNDER THE NATIONAL HEALTH ACT
IN 1959. THE TOTAL COST OF PROVIDING BENEFITS UNDER THIS SCHEME,
INCLUDING PATIENT CONTRIBUTIONS ON PRESCRIPTIONS, WAS $ 226.3 MILLION
IN 1972-73. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS INDEED ACCEPTED A NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY IN BOTH THE MEDICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL AREA ALTHOUGH
WHETHER ITS MONEY HAS BEEN WELL SPENT IS ANOTHER MATTER. / 11 
-11-
THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN HOSPITALS
IS IN SHARP CONTRAST WITH THE EXPERIENCE IN OTHER AREAS. THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED THE HOSPITALS BENEFITS ACT IN 19145 AND THIS
PROVIDED A BENEFIT OF 60 CENTS A DAY FOR ALL HOSPITAL PATIENTS.
THIS FIGURE MIGHT SEEM LAUGHABLE NOW, BUT AT THE TIME THE AVERAGE
WE COST IN AUSTRALIA WAS ONLY $ 1.40 A DAY. THUS THIS INITIAL
COMMITMENT AMOUNJTED To 43 PER CENT OF DAILY OPERATING COSTS IN
HOSPITALS. THE LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT REPLACED THE LABOR
SCHEME WITH THE PRESENT HOSPITAL BENEFIT SCHEME IN 1952. THIS
PROVIDED A COMMONWEALTH SUBSIDY OF 80 CENTS A, DAY PLUS 140 CENTS A
DAY FOR INSURED PATIENTS. STILL, IN THE CONTEXT OF THE TIME., THIS
WAS A SUBSTANTIAL SUBSIDY.
CONTRARY TO WHAT ONE MIGHT EXPECT, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT' S INVOLVEMENT IN PAYING FOR THE RUNNING OF HOSPITALS
HAS SUBSTANTIALLY DECLINED SINCE THEN. IT NOW PAYS A SUBSIDY OF
ONLY $ 2 A DAY FOR HOSPITAL PATIENTS, ALTHOUGH THERE ARE NATURALLY
PTHER BENEFITS WHICH DERIVE FROM TAXATION CONCESSIONS. IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT IN 19714-75 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO
PAY ONLY $ 165 MILLION TOWARDS THE OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS.
THIS COMPARES WITH AN ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE OF $ 5140 MILLION BY
STATE GOVERNMENTS AND $ 2140 MILLION BY INSURED AND UNINSURED PATIENTS.
IT IS NO WONDER THAT SO MANY OF OUR HOSPITALS ARE INADEQUATE. i / 12 
-12-
IT IS TIME THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSUMED A MUCH
GREATER ROLE IN THE FINANCING OF HEALTH SERVICES, IT IS NO LONGER
POSSIBLE FOR THESE SERVICES TO BE FINANCED IN THE FRAGMENTED MANNER
WHICH HAS APPLIED UNTIL NOW. No ONE WOULD EXPECT THAT ANY MAN,
HOWEVER WEALTHY, COULD AFFORD TO PAY BY HIMSELF FOR ALL THE EQUIPMENT
AND MANPOWER NECESSARY FOR HIM TO RECEIVE PROPER TREATMENT FOR A
MAJOR ILLNESS, NO ONE WOULD EXPECT ANY DOCTOR, HOWEVER WEALTHY, TO
BE ABLE TO PROVIDE BY HIMSELF ALL THE'FACILITIES AND STAFF NEEDED
TO TREAT THE RANGE OF ILLNESSES AND INJURIES HE WOULD ENCOUNTER
TODAY. WE ARE ALL DEPENDENT ON THE AVAILABILITY OF COMMUNITY
FACILITIES. I THINK I HAVE DEMONSTRATED THAT THESE FACILITIES ARE
INADEQUATE AND ARE UNEQUALLY AVAILABLE AT PRESENT. IT IS ONLY BY
THE ASSUMPTION OF A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY IN HEALTH THAT WE CAN
OVERCOME THESE INADEQUACIES,
DR EVERINGHAM TOLD YOU ON WEDNESDAY OF THE DEVELOPMENTS
THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN THE AREA NOW COVERED BY THE HOSPITAL AND
HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION. AS HE TOLD YOU, ITS AIM IS THE
" PROVISION OF HIGH QUALITY, READILY ACCESSIBLE, REASONABLY
COMPREHENSIVE, CO-ORDINATED AND EFFICIENT HEALTH AND RELATED WELFARE
SERVICES AT LOCAL, REGIONAL, STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS", WE HAVE
ALREADY ALLOCATED $ 4.5 MILLION FOR 1973-74 TO MEET URGENT NEEDS
FOR ADDITIONAL HOSPITALS IN SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, BRISBANE. SIGNIFICANTLY,
$ 4 MILLION OF THIS HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TOWARDS THE COST OF PLANNING
AND COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION OF A MAJOR HOSPITAL AT WESTMEAD
IN THE WESTERN SUBURBS OF SYDNEY MUCH MORE A CENTRE OF POPULATION
FOR THAT CITY THAN THE G. P. O. WE HAVE ALSO ALLOCATED $ 10 MILLION 
-13-
IN THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO ASSIST STATES AND ELIGIBLE ORGANISATIONS
TO MEET THE CAPITAL AND OPERATING COSTS OF REGIONALLY ORGANISED,
COMMUNITY-BASED HEALTH SERVICES, COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES,
PROVIDED AT CENTRES AND THROUGH DOMICILIARY SERVICES, OFFER A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY FOR COMBATING THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF DOCTORS AND
OTHER HEALTH WORKERS IN OUR COMMUNITY, IN ADDITION, WE HAVE PROVIDED
MILLION TO ASSIST STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL
HEALTH, ALCOHOLIC AND DRUG-DEPENDENCY SERVICES,
OUR MAJOR FRUSTRATION IN THE LAST YEAR HAS BEEN IN OUR
ATTEMPTS TO OVERHAUL THE PRESENT HEALTH INSURANCE SYSTEM AND THE
FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS THAT FLOW FROM IT, IF OPPOSITION TO OUR
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM CONTINUES TO PREVENT ITS IMPLEMENTATION
THIS WILL BE VIEWED BY FUTURE GENERATIONS AS A TRAGEDY OF GREAT
PROPORTIONS, THE PROGRAM WOULD OVERCOME THE SERIOUS PROBLEMS THAT
EXIST UNDER THE PRESENT SYSTEM, FOR A START, IT WOULD AUTOMATICALLY
COVER EVERYONE IN AUSTRALIA, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR MEANS OR THEIR
BACKGROUND. FOR MIGRANTS, THIS WOULD MEAN THAT, VIRTUALLY FROM THE
MOMENT THEY STEPPED OFF THE BOAT OR THE AIRCRAFT THAT BROUGHT THEM
TO AUSTRALIA, THEY WOULD BE PROTECTED AGAINST HEALTH COSTS, IT
WOULD BE FINANCED IN THE MOST EQUITABLE MANNER AS THE PAYMENTS TO
BE MET BY INDIVIDUALS WOULD BE BASED ON THEIR-CAPACITY TO PAY, THE
PROPOSED LEVY OF 1.35 PER CENT ON TAXABLE INCOME WOULD PROVE CHEAPER
FOR THE GREAT MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS, ,/ 14 
-14-
FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS, AUSTRALIANS WOULD RECEIVE A
COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT, IF A DOCTOR
SENDS HIS BILL DIRECT TO THE PROPOSED HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
HIS PATIENT WILL NOT HAVE TO PAY ANYTHING FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT,
EVEN IF THE DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL TO HIS PATIENT, THE COMMISSION
WILL PAY AT LEAST 85 PER CENT OF THE SCHEDULED FEE, AND IN NO CASE,
WHERE THE SCHEDULED FEE IS CHARGEDI WOULD THE PATIENT HAVE TO PAY
MORE THAN $ 5 FOR ANY MEDICAL SERVICES, To DISMISS IMMEDIATELY ONE
PHONY ISSUE THAT HAS BEEN RAISED BY OUR OPPONENTS, THESE ARRANGEMENTS
WOULD APPLY TO SERVICES PROVIDED BY ANY DOCTOR THAT ANY PATIENT
CHOSE TO CONSULT, FOR HOSPITAL TREATMENTI EVERYONE WOULD BE
ENTITLED TO FREE STANDARD WARD TREATMENT; ADMISSION TO THIESE WARDS
WOULD NOT BE RESTRICTED TO PEOPLE WHO SATISFY THE SAVAGE MEANS
TESTS WHICH APPLY IN SOME STATES AT PRESENT, THE PROGRAM WOULD
ACHIEVE THIS GOAL WITHOUT DESTROYING THE VIABILITY AND INDEPENDENCE
OF RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE AND COMMUNITY HOSPITALS, PATIENTS IN
PRIVATE WARDS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS OR IN PRIVATE HOSPITALS WOULD
ATTRACT A BED SUBSIDY OF $ 16 A DAY FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
A CONSIDERABLE IMPROVEMENT ON THE $ 2 A DAY WHICH IS CURRENTLY PAID.
THE GOVERNMENT AIMS TO ENSURE THAT PRIVATE INSURANCE IS AVAILABLE
AT REASONABLE COST TO COVER ANY EXTRA CHARGES FACED BY PRIVATE
PATIENTS, 
ONE OF THE GREAT AND CONTINUING BENEFITS THAT WOULD FLOW
FROM THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM WOULD BE IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS. UNDER BILATERAL. AGREEMENTS WITH EACH STATE, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WOULD BE PREPARED TO MEET 50 PER CENT OF THE NET OPERATING
COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS. PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN ALL STATES WOULD
BENEFIT FROM THESE ARRANGEMENTS. THE TOTAL GAIN TO STATE GOVERNMENTS
IN 1974-75 WOULD BE $ 80 MILLION. IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, TO REFER
TO MY EARLIER EXAMPLE, THE STATE WOULD GAIN AN EXTRA $ 9 MILLION
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, COMBINED WITH THE WORK OF
THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION, WOULD PROVIDE THE
MACHINERY TO ENABLE A CLOSER SCRUTINY OF THE USE OF OUR RESOURCES
FOR HEALTH SERVICES AND GREATER EFFICIENCY. TO GIVE A MINOR EXAMPLE,
THE OPERATING COSTS OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION WOULD BE ONLY
ABOUT 6 PER CENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS COMPARED TO THE 11 PER CENT
CURRENTLY SPENT BY PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS.
SOME OF YOU MAY HAVE WONDERED WHY, IN AN ADDRESS " A SOCIAL
SERVICE APPROACH To HEALTH", I HAVE MENTIONED SO FREQUENTLY. THE
WORD EFFICIENCY. THE REASON IS SIMPLE. WE CANNOT ALLOW HEALTH
COSTS IN AUSTRALIA TO RISE UNCONTROLLABLY. AT THE SAME TIME WE
ARE DETERMINED TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE HEALTH SERVICES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS.
WE MUST THEREFORE ENSURE THAT EVERY DOLLAR WE SPEND IS SPENT WISELY.
WE MUST ENSURE THAT WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE IS AVOIDED IN AREAS OF
PLENTY SO THAT THE MONEY SAVED CAN BE DEVOTED TO AREAS OF NEED. / 116 
-16-
As I ASSUME YOU ALL KNOW, OUR PLANS HAVE FOUNDERED, AT
LEAST TEMPORARILY, ON THE ROCK OF THE SENATE, THE GOVERNMENT IS
NOW CONSIDERING ITS POSITION IN RELATION TO THE HEALTH INSURANCE
PROGRAM. M HAYDEN IS LEAVING AUSTRALIA IN JUST OVE( A WELK
EXAMINE HEALTH SYSTEMS OVERSEAS, PARTICULARLY THE CANADIAN AND
AMERICAN FEDERATIONS. THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE ABANDONED
OUR LEGISLATION. BUT WE MUST LOOK AT ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS OF
FINANCING HEALTH SERVICES, PARTICULARLY PUBLIC HOSPITALS, TO ENSURE
THAT WE MEET OUR NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY. SINCE THE 1946 REFERENDUM
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT HAS HAD THE RIGHT AND DUTY TO PROVIDE
MEDICAL SERVICES, UNLESS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT AND FUTURE GOVERNMENTS ACCEPT THIS RESPONSIBILITY,
WE WILL NEVER SATISFY THE OBJECTIVES OF A SOCIAL SERVICE APPROACH
TO HEALTH IN THIS COUNTRY. UNLESS WE ACCEPT OUR NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITY, INEQUALITY, PRIVILEGE AND INADEQUACIES WILL CONTINUE
TO CHARACTERISE OUR HEALTH SYSTEM. 



NQ DATE
M/ ll 1 February 1974
EMBARGO: Not to be used in any form
before 5.30 p. m. Canberra time
1 February 1974
PRIME MINISTER IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA:
ADDRESS TO THAI-AUSTRALIA ASSOCIATION
The following is the text of the Prime Minister's
address to the Thai-Australia Association in Bangkok today,
1 Februiary 1974.
" I have had many occasions in Australia and overseas to
stress, not just the change of policies of the new Australian
Government, but the continuity within that change. Continuity
' within change ~ is one of the themes of this current journey. Its
re-assertion is one of the purposes of this visit. The relations
between Thailand and Australia perfectly illustrate that theme.
Thailand itself is a spendid example of national
continuity within change, and of change within continuity and
never more truly than in this crucial time in Thailand's long
history, a time when men and women of goodwill around the world
are drawing new hope, new encouragement, from the events in our
region. Change of quite revolutionary dimension has been the very
essence of the recent history of our region. One has only to
consider that less than 30 years ago, of the six nations on my
current itinerary, Thailand alone was independent. Or consider that
in the great area from the old north-west frontier of India to the
shore of the south west Pacific an area containing nearly a
quarter of the world's people Thailand and Australia alone were not
under colonial rule. This is one measure of the scope of change we
have lived with and are still living with. The yearning for true
national independence, for national dignity, which called this vast
change into being is still the most powerful force in our region.
That spirit has preserved the national identity and independence
of Thailand for 700 years. It is the sort of spirit which the 
Australian Government brings to its own affairs and to Australia's
relations with its neighbours, its friends and its allies. We have
tried to understand the aspiration of others as we wish others to
try to understand our own aspirations.
The Governments of both our countries have changed
relatively recently. Of course we have both changed many of our
policies. Ve are both striking out on new paths. But in both
nations there is also a basic continuity of policies. Certainly in
the case of Australia most publicity has naturally been given to the
changes, to the new directions. Yet it cannot be stressed to much
or too often that there is a basic continuity in the conduct of
Australian affairs.
Many of our decisions have been responses to developments
in the relations between the great powers. We have tried to adapt
promptly and intelligently to the new realities, particularly in
our region. In some matters, such as normalisation of relations
with China, we have been able to move more rapidly than some of our
neighbours, including Thailand, but there can be no mistaking the
dir ection events are leading us all. V~ hile developing new relationsnot
just with China but in Africa and Latin America and Eastern
Europe we have strengthened old friendships as well. This is very
much the case with Thailand.
We don't believe it is good enough that Australia should
regard countries like Thailand and her A.:: an partners merely as
some sort of military buffer placed by geography for Australia's
convenience. We have defence arrangements with such countries.
We continue to: but we want them to be viewed in the perspective
of our total relation with the region. Far from losing interest in
Thailand, the fact is that there has never been greater mutual
interest and wider exchanges between the two countries than there
is now. This interest is growing on both sides. Australia
attaches great importance to the continuing well-being of an
independent and forward-looking Thailand, a Thailand playing an
active and cooperative role in the region and adjusting its
policies skilfully to the developing international situation.
Australia and Thailand are expanding their cooperation
in all fields. More Australians than ever before are coming to 
3.
Thailand in my own case this ism ighth visit in the last
fourteen years. Many Thais have stud-*' ed in Australia and more will
come in the future. This cooperation has developed steadily over
nearly 30 years, since Australia established a mission in Thailand.
That mission was one of the first Australian posts to be opened in
South-East Asia. A high point in the development of our relations
was the visit to Australia in 1962 of their Majes-ties the King and
Queen of Thailand. We have aiso been greatly honoured that his
Royal Highness the Crown Prince is furthering his educatIon in
Australia. Australians and Thais have for twenty years been
cooperating in the development of Thailand. A number of joint
projects are being undertaken in different areas of the country
through the Australian aid program. Consultations have recently
taken place between officials of our two governments on another
important and innovative project. Through the efforts of
HRH the Princess Mother, voluntary medical units have been set up
in many provinces to improve health services for people in outlying
areas. However, due to difficulties of communication, medical
treatment is not readily available to large numbers of people in
remote areas a similar situation to that in Australia which led
to the creation of the Royal Flying Doctor Service. I am happy to
announce that, in response to a request from the Government of
Thailand, the Australian Goverrment will support the Princess
Mother's Pioneering Medical Volunteers project by providing
ambulances and radio transceivers. We hope that a pilot project
to determine the exact requirements of the communications network
will proceed in the near future. As a further example of
cooperation, Prime Minister Sanya and I yesterday decided in
principle on a cultural agreement between our two countries.
Quite recently the Australian Government held discussions
with ASEAN representatives in Bangkok on possible Australian
assistance to ASEAN projects. l~ ight now my colleague, the
Minister for Education, is in Bangkok for the conference of
South-East Asian Ministers of Education Organisation at which we
were represented for the first time as an associate member. We 
4.
recently participated for the first time in the Ministerial
Conference for the Economic Development of South-East Asia.
We are cooperating with the M~ ekong Scheme with its headquarters
in Bangkok, which has such great potential as an instrument for
the reconstruction of Indochina. In the wider region, we share
common membership of ECAFE with its headquarters also in Bangkok.
Later on I shall be making reference to SEATO, but I mention these
other matters now to show how far we have moved from a restricted
and restricting concept of our relations as being only, or even
mainly, preoccupied with defence and security. Both our countries
have a well-rounded relationship with each other. Both are anxious
to see that it ripens and matures.
To illustrate this, let me say something of our trade and
economic relationships. There are long established and valued
economic links between Australia and Thailand. Our total trade of
some SA43 million last year is not as large as we would wish, but
it has shown a rapid rise in recent years. For our part, we are
confident that such growth will continue. We recognise, moreover,
that trade must be viewed as a two-way flow. We have taken a
number of initiatives to ensure that countries such as Thailand
will have considerably greater opportunities, and greater
encouragement, to sell to the Australian market. Last year we
reduced all Australian tariffs by 25 per cent. In addition, from
the beginning of this year, we have introduced for the benefit of
developing countries a scheme whereby those countries will receive
additional preferences -in the Australian tariff. We will continue
to increase both the scope of the scheme and the margins of
preference we accord until we are satisfied that the bveloping
countries have achieved a competitive position in the Australian
market. For this purpose my Government is establishing a facilitywithin
the Australian Department of Overseas Trade to provide
market research and to handle trade inquiries for countries such
as Thailand. I invite the Government of Thailand to make use of
it. Let me remind you also that we recognise the importance you
attach to receiving fair and reasonable prices in international
markets for your primary products. Our support in international
forums for the basic justice of such an approach is well known
and will continue. 
Next a word about overseas investment. Australia
recognises that in the right circumstances Australian private
investment overseas can make a positive contribution to the
industrial development of the host country. Although Australia
in the past has not been a significant generator of capital for
investment in overseas countries, we expect more activity-in this
area in the future. We believe, however, that every country
should have the right to regulate foreign investment in accordance
with its own national aspirations and social and economic
objectives. It is a right we exercise ourselves in relation to
foreign investment in Australia. For that reason we have recently
announced that we will seek to encourage Australian private
investment overseas only where it is fully welcomed by the host
country, where it will be favourable to the country in which it
is made, and where it will be consistent with advanced labour
relations and local environmental policies.
I have said that Australia and Thailand have a wellrounded
relationship which we want to see ripen and mature, We
are bringing this approach to all our other relationships in the
region. It is by understanding this basic approach that one can
best understand the changes we have made. I can illustrate it
by reference to some of the more notable of our policies.
I mention the United States. We have an important
defence treaty with U. S. and New Zealand but the American alliance
should never have been regarded as thL-e be-all and end-all of
Australia's., defence and foreign policies and it should never have
been viewed solely or principally as a defence association. Yet
there developed in Australia over a generation a tendency to view
all matters beyond our shores through the single narrow focus of
China. What we are now trying to do is widen the range of our
vision not to downgrade the importance of our friendship with
the U. S. but to upgrade the importance of other relationships,
above all in Asia. We believe we are thereby creating a more
mature partnership. And we believe that frankness is the best
basis for friendship. We expect frankness: we intend to be
frank. I should also refer to our relations with Japan. We
are widening them beyond economics alone, important to both
countries as that aspect is. Japan is Australia's biggest 
customer: we are Japan's second biggest customer after the
United States. Obviously therefore, Australia's prosperity is.
closely linked with Japan's. We recognise Japan's need for
secure access at fair prices to the raw materials her industries
need, and so much of which Australia can provide. At the same
time, the Australian people want a fair say and a fair share in
the control and use of our own resources, just as the Thai
people recognise that investment and trade relations between.
states not merely the states of our own region must
henceforth take account of the welfare and aspirations of the
peoples of those states and cannot be based solely on business
criteria alone. I come now to China. Australia' s new relations with
China are based on the rejection of the relevance today of the
Dulles concept of military containment of China. The war of
intervention in Viet-Nam was created by that doctrine and
destroyed that doctrine. SEATO itself was originally ihe treaty
expression of the doctrine. Clearly our view of the concept which
gave birth to SEATO influences our view of SEATO's present role.
When we addressed ourselves to this matter on assuming office
14 months ago it was urged upon us that withdrawal by Australia
would damage confidence in the area. With an understanding of
the position of Thailand particularly in mind, and the importance
Thailand attaches to the Manila Treaty, we therefore agreed to
work within the organisation for modification of its operation
and orientation: underpin confidence, yes., underwrite
containment, no. And with the cooperation and agreement of all
members, this is what we have done.
Finally I mention our attitude towards regional
arrangements and associations. Of all those in this region,
ASEAN is unquestionably the most important, the most relevant,
the most natural. Australia does not seek to be a member of
ASEAN, though we have close bi-lateral and regional relationships
with all its members. My present tour takes me to four ASEAN
capitals. With each member country and with Indonesia, our
nearest neighbour, we are developing ever-increasing cooperation
at all levels, including defence cooperation. Australia is
playing a cooperative role in the other regional associations I 
7.
mentioned earlier. We are strengthening all our bi-lateral
relations in the region and are seeking new forms of regional
7 cooperation. Increasingly I believe the nations of the Asian
and Pacific region will in the future come to see the need for
a wider forum than presently exists where all who have a common
interest and a common destiny in the region can meet regularly,
quietly and constructively. On this matter I just say two
things here: nobody, least of all me, believes that any new
arrangements will come into being overnight; and secondly,
nobody, certainly not me, believe that any such arrangements
should or could supplant or absorb ASE. AN.
I recognise too that the continuing conflict in
Indochina our hopes of a year ago being still unfulfilled
represents a major obstruction to any plans for new arrangements
in our region. But the need remains, and I believe that
perception of that need will grow and sharpen.
It should be plain therefore that the direction of our
decisions and hopes are outward-looking, regional and truly
international. It is absurd to suggest that Australia is going
isolationist when the whole thrust of our policies is towards
greater international cooperation than ever before, towards
deeper interests in a greater number of nations in every
continent than ever before some of them nations which have
hitherto scarcely made a scratch upon the Australian
consciousness. New interests do not mean a loss or lessening
of old interests. They mean rather a widening of Australian
awareness, a realisation by Australians of their capacities,
their responsibilities and their opportunities. Australia has
not grown weary of international involvement, whatever our
d'isillusionment as a result of Viet-Nam.
That experience, the Viet-Nam experience, when
Australian youth decided no longer to tolerate the intolerable,
just as the youth of Thailand, in a very different context,
did so decisively last October still deeply influenlces our
judgments upon the affairs of this region and
believe we should make to events in this region. n:-
government we would be if our attitudes, declared tr\
decade when we were powerless to act, were discarded "' c~ cc~
r 
we had the power to translate those attitudes into action.
That would have been true unpredictability, true irresponsibility.
Decidedly Australia has not grown weary of being
involved: we have simply come of age. We draw a distinction
between constructive involvement and counter-productive
intervention. I hope that what my Government has been able to
show is an Australian capacity for self-renewal, just as this
ancient kingdom is demonstrating its capacity for renewal and
resilience, for change in a world of change, without rejecting
its traditions but rather involving the very essence of its
national tradition as the instrument of ordered change itself."
II1I1~ Ui--7i--I 1 



PRI1F T471NISTER' IS SPEDCXH AT THAI-AUSTRALIA ILUNCHEM DUSIT THMAHNO! T1E L
1 FEBRUARY 1974.
I have had many occasions in A~ ustralia and overseas to stress, not
just the change of policies of the new Australian Government, but the
continuity vithin thot changre. Continuity within change is one of the
themes of this current journey. Its re-assertion is one of the purposes
of this visit. The relations between Thailand and Australia perfectly
illustrate that theme. Thailand itself is a splendid example of national
continuity within change, and of chanre within continuity and never more
truly than in this crucial time in Thailand's long history, a time when men
and worren of goodwill around the world are drawinG new hope, new encouragement,
from the events in our region.
Change of quite revolutionary dimension has been the very dssence of
the recent history of our region. One has only to consider that less
than 30 years ago, of the six nations on may current itihierary, Thailand
alone was independent. Or consider that in the great area from the old
north-west frontier of India to the shore of the South west Pacific an
area containing nearly a quarter of the world'Is people Thailand and
Australia alone were not under colonial rule. This is one measure of the
scope of change we have lived with and are still living with. The yearning
for true national independence, for national dignity, which called this vast
change into being is still the most powerful force in our region. That
spirit has preserved the national identity and independence of Thailand for
700 years. It is the sort of spirit which the Australian Government brings
to its own affairs and to Australia's relations with its neighbours, its
friends and its allies. " le have tried to understand the aspiration of
others as we wish others to try to understand our own aspirations.
The Governments of both our countries have changed relatively recently.
Of course we have both changed many of our policies. We are both striking
out on new paths. But in both nations there is also a basic continuity of
policies. Certainly in the case of Australia most publicity has naturally
been given to the changes, to the new directions. Yet it cannot be
stressed too much or too often that there is a basic continuity in the
conduct of Australian affairs.
Many of our decisions have been responses to developments in the
relations between the great powers. We have tried to adapt prornpt~ y and
intelligently to the new realities, particularly in our region. In some
matters, such as normalisaition of relations with China, we have been able
to move more rapidly than some of our neighbours, including Thailand, but
there can be no mistaking the direction events are leading us all. While
developing new relations not just with China but in Akfrica and Latin
-imerica and Eastern Europe we have strengthened old friendships as well.
This is very much the Case with Thailand.
We don't believe it is good enough that Australia should regard
countries like Thailand and her Asian partners merely as some sort Of
military buffer placed by geography for Australia's convenience. We have
defence arrangements with such countries. We continue to: But we want
them to be viewed in the perspective of our total relation with the region.
Far from losing interest in Thailand, the fact is that there has never been
greater mutual interest and wider exchanges between the two countries than
there is now. This interest is growing on both sides. Australia attaches
great importance to the continuing well-being of an independent and forwardlooking
Thailand, a Thailand playing an 8ctive and cooperative role in the
region and adjusting its policies skillfully to the developing international
situation. Australia and Thailand are expanding their cooperation in all fields.
More Australians than ever before Eire coming to Th. oiland in my own case
this is my eighth visit in the last fourteen years. M~ any Thais have
studied in kustralia and more will come in the future. This co-operation
has developed steadily over nearly 50 years, since Australia established a
mission in Thailand. That mission was one of the first Australian posts 
2-
to be opened in South-East Asia. A high point in the development of
our relations was the visit to Aiustrilia in 1962 of Their Majesties the
King and Queen of Thailand. Wehave Palso been gre,-t+. y honoured tha~ t His
Royal Hi; hness The Crown Prince is furthering his education in ! Lustralia.
Australions and Thais have for twenty years been co-operating in the
development of Thailand. I number of joint projects are being undertaken
in different areas of the country through the Australian aid program.
Consultations have recently taken place between officials of our two
governmnents on another important and innovative project. Through the
efforts of HRH the Princess Mother, voluntary medical units have been set
up in many provinces to improve health services for people in outlying
areas. However, due to difficulties of communication, medical treatment
is not readily available to large numbers of people in reilote areas a
similar situation to that in A~ ustralia which led to the creation of the
Royal Flying Doctor service. I am happy to announce that, in response to
a request from the Government of Thailand, the Australian Government will
support the Princess Mother's pioneering medical volunteers project by
providing ambulances and radio transceivers. ' he hope that a pilot project
to determine the exact requirements of the communications network will
proceed in the near future. As a further example of co-operation
Prime Minister Sanya and I # wv* 1i deoided in principle on a cultural
agreement between our two countries.
Quite recently the Australian Government held discussions with ASEANI
representatives in Bangkok on possible Australian assistance to ASEAN
projects. Right now my colleague, the Minister for Education, is in
Bangkok for the Conference of South-East Asian Ministers of Education
Organisation at which we were represented for the first time we an
associate member. We recently participated for the first time in the
Ministerial Conference for the Economic Development of South East Asia.
We are co-operating with the Mekong Scheme with its headquarters in Bangkok,
which has such great potential as an instrument for the reconstruction of
Indochina. In the wider region, we share common membership of ECAFE with
its headquarters also in Bangkok. Later on I shall be making reference to
SEATO, but I mention these other matters now to show how far we have moved
from a restricted and restricting concept of our relations as being only,
or even mainly, preoccupied with defence and security. Both our countries
have a well-rounded relationship with each other. Both are anxious to see
that it ripens and matures.
To illustrate this, let me say something of our trade and conomio
relationships. There are long established and valued economic links
between t'ustralia and Thailand. Our total trade of some dollars A43 million
last year is not as largesas we would wish, but it has shown a rapid rise in
recent years. For our part, we are confident that s uch growth will
continue. We recognise, moreover, that trade must be viewed as a two-way
flow. We have taken a number of initiatives to ensure that countries such
as Thailand will have considerably greater opportunities, and greater
encouragement, to sell to the Australian market. Last year we reduced all
Australian tariffs by 25 per cent. In addition, from the beginning of this
year, wme have introduced for the benefit of developing countries a scheme
whereby those countries will receive additional preferences in the Australian
tariff. We will continue to increase both the scope of the scheme and the
margins of preference we accord until we are satisfied that the developing
countries have achieved a competitive position in the Australian market.
For this purpose my Government is establishing a facility within the
Australian Department of Overseas Trade to provide market research and to
handle trade inquiries for countries such as Thailand. I invite the
Government of Thailand to make use of it. Let me remind you also that we
recognise the importance you attach to receiving fair and reasonable prices in
international markets for your primary products. Uur support in international
forums for the basic justice of such an approach is well kniown and will
continue. 
3
Next a word about overseas investment. -Australia recognises that
in the right circumstances Australianlri) tG investment overseas can make a
positive contribution to the industrial development of the host country.
Although Australia in the past has not been a significant generator of
capital for investment in overseas countries. We expect more activity
in this area in the future. We believe, however, that every country
should have the right to regulate foreign investment in accordance with
its own national aspirations and social and economic objectives. It is
a right we exercise ourselves in relation to foreign investment in
Australia. For that reason we have recently announced that we will seek
to encourage Australian private investment overseas only where-it is fully
welcomed by the host country, where it will be favourable to the country
in which it is made, and where it will be consistent with advanced labour
relations and local environmental policies.
I have aid that Australia and Theiland have a well-rounded
relationship which we want to see ripen and mature. We are bringing this
approach to all our other relationships in the region. It is by
understanding this basic approach thot one can best understand the changes
we have made. I can illustrate it by reference to some of the more
notable of our policies.
I mention the United States. We have an important defence treaty
with U. S. and New Zealand but the American alliance should never have been
regarded as the be-all and end-all of Australia's defence ard foreign
policies and it should never have been viewed solely or principally as a
defence association. Yet there developed in Australia over a generation
a tendency to view all matters beyond our shores through the single narrow
focus of China. What we are now trying to do is widen the range of our
vision not to downgrade the importance of our friendship with the U. S.
but to upgrade the importance of other relationships, above all in Lsia.
We believe we are thereby creating a more mature partnership. And we
believe that frankness is the best basis for friendship. We expect
franknesss We intend to be frank.
I should also refer to our relations with Japan. We are widening
them beyond economics alone, important to both countries as that aspect is.
Japan is Australia's bigest customers We are. Japan's second biggest
customer after the United States. Obviously therefore, Australia's
prosperity is closely linked with Japan's. We recognise Japan's need
for secure access at fair prices to the raw materials her industries need,
and so much of which Australia can provide. At the same time, the
Australian people want a fair say and a fair share in the control and use
of our own resources, just as the Thai people recognise that investment
and trade relations between States not merely the States of our own
region henceforth take account of the welfare and aspirations of the
peoples of those States and cannot be based solely on business criteria.
alone. I come now to China. Australia's new relations with China are
based on the rejection of the relevance today of the DWlles concept of
military containment of China. The war of intervention in Vietnam was
created by that doctrine skid destroyed that doctrine. SEATO itself was
originally the treaty expression of the doctrine. Clearly our view of
the con~ cept which gave birth to SEATO influences our view of SEATO's present
role. When we addressed ourselves to this matter on assuming office 14
months ago it was urged upon us that withdrawal by Australia would damage
confidence in the area. ' With an understanding of the position of Thailand
particularly in mind, and the importance Thailand attaches to the Manila
Treaty, we therefore agreed to work within the organisation for modification
of its operation and orientation: Underpin confidence, Yes., underwrite
containment, no. And with the co-operation and agreement of all members,
this is what we have done. 
Finally I mention our attitude towards regional arrangements and
associations. Of all those in this region, AS= AN is unquestionably the
most important, the most releva~ nt, the Most natural. &amp; ustralia does not
seek to be a member of ASEON, though we have close bi-lateral and regional
relationships with all its members. My present tour takes me to four
ASEhN capitals. . with each member country and with Indonesia, our nearest
neighbour, we are developing ever-increasing co-operation at all levels,
including defence co-operation. Australia is playing a co-operative
role in the other regional associations I mentioned earlier. We are
strengthening all our bi-lateral~ relations in the region and are seeking
new forms of regional co-operation. Increasingly I believe the nations
of the Asian and Pacific region will in the future come to see the need for
a 7wider forum than presently exists where all who have a commnon interest and
a oommon destiny in the region can meet regularly, quietly and constructively.
On this matter I just say two things heret Nobody, least of all me, believes
that any new arrangements will come into being overnight.., And secondly,
nobody, certainly not me, believe that any such arrangements should or
could supplant or absorb ASEAN.
I recognise too that the continuing conflict in Indochina our hopes
of a year ago being still unfulfilled represents a major obstruction to
any plens for new arrangements in our region. But ' the need remains, and
I believe that perception of that need will grow and sharpen.
It should be plain therefore that the direction of our decisions and
hopes are outword-looking, regional and truly international. It is
absurd to suggest that Australia is going isolationist when the whole thrust
of our policies is towards greater international co-operation than ever
before, towards deeper interests in a great number some of them nations
which have hitherto scarcely made a scratch upon the Australian consciousness.
New interests do not mean a loss or lessening of old interests. They mean
rather a widening of Australian awareness, a realisation by Australians of
their capacities, their responsibilities and their opportunities.
Australia has not grown weary of international involvement, whatever our
disillusionment as a result of Vietnam.
That experience, the Vietnam experience when Australian youth
decided no longer to to'. erate the intolerable, just as the youth of
Thailand, in a very different context, did so decisively last October
still deeply influences our judgments upon the affairs of this region and
the responses we believe we should make to events in this region. What
a strange government we would be if our attitudes, declared throughout a
decade when we were powerless to act, were discarded the moment we had the
power to translate those attitudes into action. That would have been true
unpredictability, true irresponsibility.
Decidely Australia has not grown weary of being involved: Vie have
simply come of age. We draw a distinction between constructive involvement
and counter-productive intervention. I hope that what myr Government has
been able to show is an Australian capacity for self-renewal, just as this
ancient Kingdom. is demonstrating its capacity for renewal and resilience,
for change in a world of change, without rejecting its traditions but rather
involving the very essence of its national tradition as the instrument of
ordered change itself.
7-



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, MP.,
AT A LUNCHEON GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF THE ROYAL
GOVERNMENT OF LAOS. VIENTIANE; 4 FEBRUARY, 1974-
I AM INDEBTED TO YOUR HIGHNESS FORGIVING ME THE
OPPORTUNITY DURING MY PRESENT JOURNEY TO VISIT VIENTIANE
AND TO RENEW AN ACQUAINTANCE BEGUN WHEN YOU YOURSELF WERE
IN AUSTRALIA SOME YEARS AGO. I WELCOME TOO THE OCCASION
TO INFORM MYSELF OF THE ACHIEVEMENTS AND PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE LONG AWAITED RETURN OF PEACE AND ORDER THROUGHOUT
YOUR COUNTRY, AS YOU WILL KNOW, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
FIRMLY SUPPORTS THE PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL INTEGRITY#
INDEPENDENCE AND NEUTRALITY OF LAOS DECLARED IN THE GENEVA
AGREEMENTS AND LOOKS TO THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO ENDORSE
AND SUPPORT THEM.
AUSTRALIA WELCOMED BOTH THE FEBRUARY AGREEMENT AND
THE SUBSEQUENT PROTOCOL IN SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEAR. WE SAW
THESE AS HIGHLY IMPORTANT IN THEMSELVES, BUT ALSO AS
ENCOURAGING AND HEARTENING EVIDENCE OF A SPIRIT OF GOODWILL,
MAGNANIMITY AND CO-OPERATION AMONG ALL PARTIES IN LAOS OF
WILLINGNESS TO PURSUE A MUTUALLY ACCEPTABLE COMPROMISE IN THE
PRESIDING INTEREST OF A GENUINE NATIONAL RECONCILIATION.
I KNOW HOW MUCH IMPORTANCE YOU PERSONALLY HAVE ATTACHED TO
THIS GREAT OBJECTIVE OF NATIONAL RECONCILIATION AND HOW MUCH
IS OWED TO YOUR WISE JUDGMENT AND IMAGINATIVE LEADERSHIP IN
THE PROGRESS YOU HAVE MADE TOWARDS IT. 
-2-
I SPEAK FOR ALL MY FELLOW AUSTRALIANS WHEN I SAY THAT
AUSTRALIA UNDERSTANDS HOW MUCH NOW HASTO BE DONE TO BIND
UP THE WOUNDS OF WAR, TO REPAIR THE LOSS AND DAMAGE OF SO
PROTRACTED A CONFLICT, ALL OF US IN THIS ROOM ARE CONSCIOUS
OF WHAT THE TRAGIC EVENTS OF THE RECENT PAST HAVE MEANT IN
TERMS OF FAMILY BEREAVEMENT AND HUMAN SUFFERING, THE PAINFUL
REALITY WHICH UNDERLIES THE MACABRE STATISTICS OF WAR,
WE CAN NEVERTHELESS LOOK FORWARD WITH OPTIMISM TO A BRIGHTER
FUTURE FOR ALL THE PEOPLE OF LAOS. WE CONFIDENTLY EXPECT
THAT THE DAY IS NOT FAR OFF WHEN A COALITION GOVERNMENT
WILL MAKE A START IN HARNESSING NATIONAL ENERGIES FOR THE URGENT
TASKS OF REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION,
IN THISWORK ALL FRIENDS OF LAOS WILL WISH TO MAKE
SOME CONTRIBUTION TO PROMOTE THE POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
TALENTS AND RESOURCES OF ALL ITS PEOPLES, MY OWN GOVERNMENT STANDS
READY TO TAKE PART IN THIS COMMON ENDEAVOUR. I BELIEVE THAT THERE
ARE AREAS IN WHICH AUSTRALIAN EXPERIENCE HAS ALREADY PROVED
TO HAVE PARTICULAR RELEVANCE TO THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF THIS
COUNTRY, AS FOR INSTANCE, IN AFFORESTATION AND IN PASTURE
ESTABLISHMENT UNDER TROPICAL CONDITIONS. IN SUCH FIELDS WE
MAY BE ABLE TO EXPAND OUR PRESENT CONTRIBUTION, IF YOU WISH US
TO DO SO, HELPING TO PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT IN THE PROCESS TO
REFUGEES AND DEMOBILISED SOLDIERS, AND TO LAY FOUNDATIONS FOR
THE CONTROLLED DEVELOPMENT OF IMPORTANT NATIONAL RESOURCES,
WE ARE HAPPY, TOO, TO CONTINUE OUR CONTRIBUTION TO FOREIGN
EXCHANGE SUPPORT FOR LAOS. IN OTHER DIRECTIONS WE LOOK FORWARD
TO PURPOSEFUL AND PRACTICAL DISCUSSIONS WITH YOU OF WAYS IN
WHICH YOU THINK WE MIGHT HELP, AND WHERE WE WOULD COUNT IT A'
PRIVILEGE TO SERVE, 
-3-
WE ARE ALSO INTERESTED IN EXPLORING WITH YOU THE
POSSIBILITY OF AN AGREEMENT TO ENCOURAGE TRADE BETWEEN
OUR TWO COUNTRIESy
AUSTRALIA AND LAOS WILL BOTH PROSPER BEST THROUGH
A COMBINATION OF OUR OWN EFFORTS AND THE PROMOTION OF
A HELPFUL CLIMATE OF INTERNATIONAL OPINION AND BEHAVIOURX
WE HAVE TO BE BOTH NATIONALIST AND INTERNATIONALISTy WE
SEE LAOS, AS IT SEES ITSELF, AS PART OF A REGION LINKED BY
GEOGRAPHY, CIRCUMSTANCES AND HISTORY TO THE OTHER COUNTRIES
OF INDO-CHINA AND AS A NEIGHBOUR ALSO TO BURMA, THAILAND
AND CHINAX LAOS DRAWS A RICH AND FASCINATING INHERITANCE
FROM ALL THESE ASSOCIATIONS, WOVEN INTO THE FABRIC OF
POPULAR LIFE AND FURNISHING THE BACKGROUND OF THE NATIONAL
GENIUSy AUSTRALIA IS A MORE RECENT NEIGHBOUR WITH A SHORTER,
MUCH SHORTER, AWARENESS AND EXPERIENCE OF THIS AREA* BUT WE
ACCEPT FULLY AND COMPLETELY THE EXTENT TO WHICH OUR DESTINIES
ARE BOUND UP WITH YOURSX THEY BOTH LARGELY DEPEND UPON THE
DEGREE OF SUCCESS THAT ATTENDS THE LABOURS OF US ALL TO
CONTRIBUTE TO A PEACEFUL WORLD ORDER AND THE PROSPECT OF
PEACEFUL ACCESS TO A FAIR SHARE OF ITS RESOURCES FOR ALL ITS
PEOPLES) 
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER EXAMPLE TO PRESENT AND
FUTURE GENERATIONS OF LEADERS IN LAOS, IN INDO-CHINA AND,
INDEED, THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE REGION OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA
THAN THE UNREMITTING LABOUR YOUR HIGHNESS HAS DEVOTED TO
PEACEy IT IS IN THE HOPE OF SEEING EXTENDED THE AREA OF
PEACE, OF FRATERNAL DIALOGUE AND DISCUSSION THAT I WILL
LEAVE VIENTIANE, ENCOURAGED BY THE CONVICTION THAT THE PATH
OF NEGOTIATION ON WHICH YOU ARE NOW EMBARKED IS THE RIGHT
ONE FOR LAOS AND FOR THE REGION OF WHICH IT IS PARTK
WE SHALL FOLLOW WITH THE KEENEST INTEREST AND SYMPATHY
THE OUTCOME OF YOUR ENDEAVOURS)( YOU MAY COUNT UPON US FOR
SUPPORT IN YOUR ACHIEVEMENTy
FINALLY, ON BEHALF OF ALL IN MY PARTY, MAY I EXPRESS
MY DEEP APPRECIATION OF YOUR GENEROUS HOSPITALITY TO US ALLX
I REGRET THAT CIRCUMSTANCES HAVE NOT PERMITTED A LONGER STAY
AND WIDER ACQUAINTANCE WITH LAOSk WE LEAVE WITH YOU OUR MOST
EARNEST HOPES AND GOOD WISHES FOR THE FUTURE PEACE AND
PROGRESS, SO EARNESTLY DESIRED BY EVERY LAO, WHICH WILL
REPRESENT THE CULMINATION OF YOUR EFFORTS AS A STATESMAN AND
PEACEMAKERX 



11" ZIWS RELEASE
NQ9 DATE
M/ 13 6 Feb'riary 1974
PRIMEMINISTER'S VISIT TO BURMA
The following is the text of an address given by the
Prime M'inister, Mr Whitlam, at a dinner given in his honour by the
Chalirman of the Revolutionary Council o~ f the Socialist Republic of
the Union of Burma, U Ne Win, in Rangoon on 5 February 1974.
" Although this is not my first-visit to the Socialist Republic
of the Union of B-. rma, I come here on this occasion as the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit your country. In so doing, I
acknowledge with gratitude -the warm arid generous welcome accorded
to my -wife and me, and to our party.
We look forward, Mr Chairman, to welcoming you and your
gracious wife to Australia. I hope these visits will serve as the
basis for further fruitful development in the range and nature
of the relationship between our two countries. I believe there are
grounds for confidence that, because we now share more common
interest than we did before, there will emerge a more intimate and
substantial relationship between Australia and Burma.
For our part, we are seeking to chart a new course for
Australia in its relations with the countries of Asia. By adopting
a more independent Australian stance in international affairs, by
striving to turn Australia away from a military orientation in its
relations with South-East Asia and by trying to remove the stain of
racialism from our policies, we hope to achieve for Australia a new
standing as a distinctive, tolerant and co-operative nation9 not
only in Asia but in the world.
In support of these objectives we have shifted the emphasis
of our continuiLng involvement in Asia, and especially in South-East
Asia, from one dominated by 7ideological distinctions and military
alliances to one based more on encouraging security through regional
co-operation, on facilitating trade with our near neighbours on a
mutually benef-icial basis, and on promoting economic development 
2.
through constructive aid programs where these are wanted and where
our own resources and skills can be usefully applied. Wae see a
greater range of contacts through tourism9 education and culture.
Such contacts, we believe, will contribute significantly to
furthering our understanding of one another. I also believe that
ministerial and parliamentary visits, like those exchanged recently
between Australia and Burma, are of grea t value to both of us, an~ d I
would hope to see such v isits extended.
I stress that we do not seek to impose any unwanted culture
or alien forms upon our friends. Nor do we seek to provide economic
assistance where this is not welcome or useful. While we desire
to live more intimately with Asia than. we have in the past, we accept
that in many ways the extent and nature of this new relationship is
not ours alone to determine, because we seek to retain our own
freedom of choice and to develop our own in~ depen~ dence and
distinctiveness, we appreciate the aspirations of others to do the
same. In coming to Burma at this time I apprerolate that you are in
the middle of an election an historic election consequent upon the
introduction of a new cons titut ion,-. I am aware that the introductian'
of the constitutioni and the consultations with The people in the
course of the drafting process represent the culmination of your
long-held aspirations for the evolution of a form of government -i
Burma suited to the needs of the country and its people and that for
more than two years it'has imposed a heavy ' burden on you and yo-ui'
ministers. I congratulite you on the successful outcome of the
national referend= u on the constitution held last December. Irn
the same month there was a referendum in Australia on constitutional
changes. I may say, sir, that I envy you in the success you achie-vedi
in your referendum0
Australians have long admired the way Burma has maintained itsi
independence by its owni efforts and by the skill, determination and
spirit of stu-rdy self-reliance which have enabled you to negotiate
your w! ay through so many difficulties created by the interference ofI
outside countries in the affairs of the region. We have not~ lced
that in the United Nations, and in other councils, Burma has sic'Ken.
eloquently of its opposition to imperialism, colonialism, nuclear
weapons testing, racial discrimination. and apartheid. You-have
stressed the fundatentaL importance and here I quote Your
I I I
A
* 1
1, 
distinguished Foreign Minister " of promoting the progressive
establishment of and a universal respect for the role of law".
These are all matters on which my Government, too, has deep
convictions. They are matters in which my Government has taken
important policy initiatives in the past year.
I believe Australia and Burma share a number of common
objectives in our immediate region. We seek to avoid destructive
confrontations and to bring about constructive co-operation. We
hope to see evolve, in time, a truly regional ccmmunity without
ideological overtcnes and free of great power rivalries. We seek
a durable peace in South-East Asia in partnership with other nations
of the region. I understand the name " Rangoon" is derived from
Burmese words meaning " end of strife". Our goal, indeed, is a
South-East Asia free from strife. It will no doubt take time to
achieve that goal and the rest of'our common objectives in the
region and elsewhere. In the meantime, however, I look to tne
consolidation of our bilateral relat. ons, believing that such
consolidation will bring us closer to the realisation of our wider
goals and aspirations.
I am happy to have your assurances of the usefulness of the
Australian aid program in Burma. There will be an annual inrcrease
in the size of that program. The Australian Government has pledged
itself to increase the level of its financial development assistance
to .7 per cent of gross domestic product by the end of the decade.
We also intend to increase the percentage of our aid given through
multilateral programs. Burma's developing relationship with the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank means that in this area
also we will be able increasingly to contribute to Burma's prcGrras
for economic development.
I give these assurances in the full awareness that t" Cre ; il
be new claims on Australia, especially from the emerging cc:.' r:-s
of the South Pacific area, and that shortages of energy ar.
will raise uncertainties about the economic and financia-
Australia and Burma are both rich in natural resources, n
the happy position of having full national control over
My Government faces the urgent task of progressively
over the development of Australia's mineral resources 
of' which are now owned by foreign companies. At the same time we
are developing policies for the balanced development of our resources
and to control their sale in accordance with our national interests
in a world where energy is scarce.
Mr Chairman, I have deeply appreciated the frank and fruitful
discussions we have had during my visit. I believe we have
established that there are opportunities for growth and development
in many aspects of our relationship. Especially I would hope to see
positive development in the areas of trade, aid and cultural
contacts. Australians have much to learn from the rich cultural and
philosophical heritage that belongs to our near neighbours, by
learning mor e about this heritage we will be better placed to gain
from it, so that our perception of the needs and interests of these
countries will be deepened and enlarged. My Government will do all
it can to promote the flow of ideas and experience from the ancient
civilisations of our neighbourhood. My visit to Burma o brief,
yet so memorable will equip us better for that task. I have, had
the opportunity to hear your views and to explain our own J shall
leave with a better understanding of your policies, your -culture and
your people, confident that on the basis of this new'understanding
we will forge a rich, valuable and enduring friendship between our
two countries. 



SPEECH BY THE PR;' Inr MINI6Trh OF AU6T_' nLIA, THE HON. E. G.
WHITLAM, AT THE DINNEr GIVEN AT 8.00 PM
WEDNESDAY 6 FEBRUARY 1974 BY U NE VIN, . WIPAN OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL AND PRIME MINISTER OF THE
SOCIALIST REPUBL1C OF THE UNION OF ] BURMA
Although this is not my first visit to the
Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma, I come here
on this occasion as the first Australian Prime
Minister to visit your country. In so doing, I
acknowledge with gratitude the warm and generous
welcome accorded to my wife and me, and to our
party. We look forward, Mr Chairman, to welcoming
you and your gracious wife to Australia. I hope
these visits will serve as the basis for further
fruitful development in the range and nature of the
relationship between our two countries. I believe there
are grounds for confidence that, because we now share
more common interests than we did before, there will
emerge a more intimate aid substantial relationship
between Australia and Burma.
For our part, we are seeking to chart a new
course for Australia in its relations with the countries
of Asia. By adopting a more independent Australian stance
in international affairs, by striving to turn Australia
away from a military orientation in its relations with
South-East Asia and by trying to remove the stain of
racialism from our policies, we hope to achieve for
Australia a new standing as a distinctive, tolerant and
co-operative nation, not only in Asia but in the world. 
In support of these objectives we have shifted
the emphasis of our continuing involvement in Asia,
and especially in South-East Asia, from one dominated
by ideological distincti(_ ns and military alliances to
one based more on encouraging security through regional
co-operation, on facilitating trade with our near
neighbours on a mutually beneficial basis, and on
promoting economic developnwnt through constructive
aid pro,_-rams where these are wanted and where our own
resources and skills can be usefully applied. We see
a greater range of contacts through tourism,
education and culture.
Such contacts, we believe, will.. oontribute
significantly to furthering our understanding of
one another. I also believe that Ministerial and
Parliamentary visits, like those exchanged recently
between Australia and Burma, are of great value to
both of us, and I would hope to see ouch visits
extended. I stress that we do not seek to impose any
unwanted culture or alien forms upon our friends. Nor
do we seek to provide economic assistance where this
is not welcome or useful1. While we deqire to live
more intimately with Asia than we have in the past, we
accept that in many ways the extent and nature of this
new relationship is not ours alone to determine.
Because we seek to retain our own freedom of choice and
to develop our own independence and distinetiveriea,. vre
appreciate the aspirations of othere to do the same, 
In coming to Burma at this time I appreciate
that you are in the middle of an election an historic
election consequent upon the introduction of a new
Constitution. I am aware that the introduction of the
Constitution and the consultations with the people
in the course of the drafting process represent the
culmination of your long-held aspirations for the
evolution of a form of government in Burma suited to the
needs of the country and its people, arid'. that for more
than two years it has impoised a heavy burden on you and
your Ministers. I congratulate you on the successful
outcome of the national referendum, on the Constitution
held last December. In the sare month there was a
Referendum in Australia on Constitutional changes, I may
say, Sir, that I envy you in the success you achieved
in your Referendum. I
Australians have-long admired the way Burma
has maintained its independence by its own efforts
and by the skill, determination and spirit of sturdy
self-reliance which have enabled you to negotiate your
way through so many difficulties createdi by the
interference of outside countries in the affairs of
the region. We have noticed that in the United Naticns, and
in other councils, Burma has spoken eloquently of its
opposition to imperialism, colonialism, nuclear weapons
testing, racial discrimination and apartheid.* You have
stressed the fundamental importance and hcre I quote
your distinguished Foreign Minister " of promoting the
progressive establishmnent of and a universal respect for
the role of law". These are all matters on which my
Government, too, has deep convictions. They are matters
in which my Government has taken important policy
initiatives in the past year. 
I believe Australia and Burma share a number
of common objectives in ou immediate region. We seek
to avoid destructive confrontations aLrl to b. ing about
constructive co-operation. We hope to see evolve, in
time, a truly regional community without ideological
overtones and free of Great Power rivalries. We seek
a durable peace in South-.. East Asia in partnership
with other nations of the region. I understand the
name " Rangoon" is derived from Burmese words meaning
" end of strife". Our goal, indeed, is a South-
East Asia free from strife. It will no doubt take
time to achieve that goal and the rest of our common
objectives in the region and elsewhere. In the meantime,
however, I look to the consolidation of our bilateral
relations, believing that such consolidation will
bring us closer to the realisation of our wider goals
and aspirations. I am happy to have your assurances of the
useiulness of the Australian Aid Program in Burma.
There will be an annual inarease in the size of that
program. The Australian Government has pledged itself
to increase the level of its financial development
assistance to .7 per centof Gross Domestic Product by
the end of the decade. We also intend to increase
the percentage of our aid given through multilateral
programs. Burma's developing relationship with the
World Ba. ilc and the Asian Development Bank means that
in this area also we will be able increasingly to
contribut6 to Burma's programs for economic development. 
I give these assurances in t Uhe full awareness
that there will be ne-w claims on Aastralia2 especially
from the emerging countries of the S3outh Pacific area,
and that shortages of energy and r -Iourcos will raise
uncertainties about the economic and financial future.
Australia and Burma are both rich in natural resources.
Burma is in the ha-, ppy position o-L hO. ving full
national control over its resources. liy Government
faces the urgent task of progressively resuming control
over the development of Australia's mineral resources,
a large part of which are now owned by foreign companies.
At the same time we are developing policies for the
balanced development of our resources and to control
their sale in accordance with our national interests
in a world where energy is scarce.
Mr Chairman, I have deeply appreciated the
frank and fruitful discussions we have had during my
visit. I believe we have established that there are
no problems between . our two countries, but rather
that there are opportunities for growth and development
in many aspects of our r.,; ationship. Especially I would
hope to see positive development in the areas of trade,
aid and cultural contacts.
Australians have much to learn from the rich
cultural and philosophical heritage that belongs to our
near neighbours. By learning more about this heritage
we will be better placed to gain from it, so that our
perception of the needs and interests of these countries
will be deepened and enlarged. My Government will do all
it can to promote the flow of ideas and experience from
the ancient civilisations of our neighbourhood. My visit
to Burma so brief, yet so memorable will equip us
better for that task. Thave had the opportunity to 
6.
hear your views and to explain our own. I shall leave
with a better understanding of your policies, your
culture and your people, confident that on the basis
of this new understanding we will forge a rich,
valuable and enduring friendship between our two
countries. w A* * K 



D\, iZW S RELEASE
NQ DATE
M/ 14 6 February 1974
T4,
PRIME MINISTER IN LAOS
Following is the text of an address by the Prime
MVinister, Mr Whitlam, at a luncheon given in his honour
by the Prime M~ inister of the Royal Government of Laos in
Vientiane on Monday, 4 February:
" I am obliged to Your Highness for giving me the
opportunity during my present journey to pay this visit to
Vientiane and to renew an acquaintance begun when you yourself
were in Australia some years ago. I welcome too the occasion to
inform myself of the achievements and problems associated with tbhe
long awaited return of peace and order throughout your country.
As you will know the Australian Government firmly supports the
principles declared in the Geneva Agreements, as to the nzational
integrity, independence and neutrality of Laos and looks to the
international community to endorse and to respect them.
Australia welcomed both the February Agreement and the
subsequent Protocol in September of last year, seeing these as
highly important in themselves but also as encouraging and
heartening evidence of a spirit of goodwill, magnanimity and
co-operation among all parties in Laos of willingness to pursue
a mutually acceptable compromise on the presiding interest of a
genuine national reconciliation. I know how much importance you
personally have attached to this great objective of national
reconciliation and how much is owed to your wise judgment and
imaginative leadership in the progress towards it so far achieved.
I speak for all my fellow Australians when I say that
Australia understands how much now has to be done to bind up the
wounds of war, to repair the loss and damage of so protracted a
conflict. All of us in this room are conscious of what the tragic 
events of the recent past have meant in terms of family
bereavement and human suffering, the painful reality which
underlies the macabre statistics of war. But we can
nevertheless look forward with optimism to a brighter future
for all the people of Laos. We cant confidently expect that the
day is not far off when a Coalitionñ Government can make a start
on harnessing national energies for urgent tasks of rehabilitation
and reconstruCtion0 In this work all friends of Laos will wish to make some
contribution to promote the positive development of the talents
and resources of all its peoples. My own Government stands ready
to take part in this common endeavour. I believe that there are
areas in which Australian experience has already proved to have
particular relevance to the special needs of this country, as for
instance, in afforestation a-r~ d i~ n pasture establishment under
tropical conditions. In such fields we may be able to expand
our present contribution, if you wish us to do so, helping to
provide employment in the process to refugees and demobilised
soldiers, and to lay foundations fo-r the controlled development
of important nat-ional resources. We are happy too to continue
our contribution to foreign exchange support for Laos. 1.11 . h1er
directions we look forward to purposeful and practical. discussions
with you of ways in which you think we might help, and where we
would count it a privilege to serve. We are also interested in
exploring with you the possibility of an agreement to encourage
trade between our two countries.
Australia and Laos will both prosper best through a
combination of our own efforts and the promotion generally of a
helpful climate of international. opinion and behaviour. We have
to be both nationalist and internationalist. We see Laos, as it
sees itself, as part of a region linked by geography, circumstances
and history, to the other countries of Indo-China but as a
neighbour also to Burma, Thailand and China. Laos draws a rich
and fascinating inheritance from all these associations, woven
into the fabric of popular life and furnishing the background
of the national genius0 Australia is a more recent neighbour
with a shorter, much shorter, awareness and experience of this -N 
3,
area, but we accept fully and completely the extent to which
our destinies are bound up with yours. They both largely depend
upon the degree of success that attends the labours of us all to
Scontribute to a peaceful world order and the prospect of peaceful
access to a fair share of its resources for all its peoples.
There could be no better example to present and future
generations of leaders in Laos in Indo-China, and indeed,
throughout the whole region of South-East Asia, than the
unremitting labour Your Highness has devoted to peace. It is in
the hope of seeing extended the area of peace, of fraternal
dialogue and discussion, that I will leave Vientiane, heartened
and encouraged by the conviction that the path of negotiation on
which you are now embarked is the right one for Laos, and for
the region of which it is part. We shall follow with the keenest
interest and sympathy the outcome of your endeavours and you may
count upon us for support in your achievement.
Finally on behalf of all in my party here today, may I
express my deep appreciation of your generous hospitality to
us all. I regret that circumstances have not permitted a longer
stay and wider acquaintance with Laos. We go away sorry that our
stay was not longer, but leaving our most earnest hopes and good
wishes for the future peace and progress, so earnestly desired
by every Lao, which will represent the culmination of your
efforts as a statesman and peacemaker." 



AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSION
EMBARGOED UNTIL 9.00 PM 7 FEBRUARY 7 February 1974
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
QC., AT A STATE DINNER GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF
SINGAPORE, MR LEE KUAN YEW, SINGAPORE, THURSDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 1974.
Each time one comes to Singapore, one is reminded of its
economic progress and vitality.
I can think of few countries in which one of the major problems
of the developing world namely sustaining the momentum of economic
growth has been so firmly and successfully met.
This is a nation which has carried out an industrial
revolution and an urban revolution of tremendous import and importance
to this region. I wish to assure you tonight, Mr Prime Minister, of Australia's
strong and continuing interest in maintaining a substantial and enduring
relationship with Singapore, and indeed with all the countries of South-
East Asia. I would like to stress that what has changed since myw Government
came to office is not the degree of Australian interest in South-East
Asia but the nature and direction of that interest. As I have often
said during my present tour, the emphasis of our growing interest will
be less influenced by ideological considerations but more by a
constructive approach, more permanent, more enduring, co-operation
through trade, investment, aid, cultural and other contacts. Defence
co-operation continues, but other forms of co-operation grow.
Behind the change the Australian Government has made lies
partly the political changes occurring within several countries of
the region changes of Government in Australia and New Zealand,
profound constitutional changes in Thailand, Burma and the Philippines,
and the virtual creation of a new independent nation in Papua New Guinea.
It's worth recalling these matters, not least for the benefit
of Australians, because there is a tendency in Australia to think that
Australia has been the only country in the region where there has been
change. Yet important as these internal political changes are, and
significant as the changes in external policies resulting from domestic
change are, they are only part of rapid and dramatic changes taking
place in the wider region in the relations between the great powers. 
-2-
Super-imposed on all these changes, re-inforcing them, complicating
them and where the changes are beneficial threatening them, is the
energy crisis. The political changes in countries like Australia may
look small beer indeed in the face of such tremendous events.
The great thing however is that these events re-inforce the
idea of the mutual interdependence, of all nations not least of
Singapore and Australia. We are the two great traders of the neighbourhood
our very life depends upon it. Wie are among the two most highly
urbanised countries on earth; we are both essentially nations of cityadwellers.
We are both technological nations, our people and our
economies relying not only on our skills, but on our getting access
to the physical means for applying those skills. Perhaps more than
any nations in the region, we both depend upon our ability to develop
effectively tho. skills of our peoples. And our prosperity depends on
the Drosperity of others. The same developments in Japan, in Britain
and lurope, in the United States: which might damage Singapore would
certainly and simultaneously damage Australia. When we consider the
inter-relationship of national economies, the inter-dependence of the
world economy, it is hardly possible to conceive a prosperous Australia
without a prosperous Singapore.
So there was never a time when our mutual interests and
concerns have been closer,
Sure, Australia's perception of Singapore has changed; it
has widened and broadened.
True, there was a time when Singapore was Asia in Australian
minds, to the extent that we thought much about Asia at all, except
in terms of vague menace. And the perception of Singapore was of
British Singapore, not of Asian Singapore. In 1974 I can say
emphatically that Australia's deep and continuing interest in Singapore,
its welfare, its progress, its role in the region, is a genuine
Australian perception of Singapore as a dynamic, pace-setting Asia
nation. Mir Prime Minister there is no head of Government with whom
I have had a longer, closer association, You extended friendship to
me in days when the party and its lead(-rship were discounted; and you
know from your own experience that friendship and attention extended
in days of adversity aand apparent hopelessness is the most worth
having, because the most sincere.. I have always deeply valued our
association. I value it all the more now that that association can
so significantly affect the basic well-being of the peoples of our
two countries. Our countries have so much in common. Naturally, where the
circumstances of our two nations are different, there will be
different perceptions, At Ottawa last year, some of these differences
were-ventilated that was indeed an illustration of the valua we place
on the Commonwealth forum where frankness in exchange Of Views and
ideas provides one of its main advantages and strengths. I hope,
I believe that one day the states of Asia and the Pacific will be able
to set up a similar sort of forum where leaders can meet not in an
atmosphere of fear or crisis or of expection of aid, but to exchange
views and remove misunderstandings before they develop further. 
-3-
I am visiting your country and other South-East Asian states
to demonstrate Australia's continuing more than continuing, our
growing and deepening interest in developing close and friendly ties
with our neighbours.
I hope to place Australia firmly, confidently, co-operatively
in the context of our Asian future.
If we have bilateral problems let us sort thase out in a spirit
of goodwill; if we have different perceptions of world developments,
let us seek to pool our ideas. Our two countries have a long history
of past and friendly co-operation; it is still very much Australian
policy to foster and develop this further.
And they are being developed to our mutual advantage.
We Australians do wish t'Umoo ve away from the idea that our relations
are limited to a defence relationship important as that aspect of
our co-operation is, and will continue to be. It is not just a matter
of bilateral relations at the Government level. There is strengthening
and widening of relations between our peoples Australian tourists,
Singapore students, Australian business, Singapore markets, in civil
aviation, in communicationst in professional interchange over a
whole range of matters which axe important to the people, not just the
politicians. This exchange and interchange on-going and expandingis
the real basis of the developing friendships between our peoples. 



NEWS RELEASE
NQ DATE
M/ 19 11 February 1974i
PRIME MINISTER IN SINGAPORE'
The following is the text of an address by the
Prime IEinister, 11r Vhitlam, to the Singapore Press Club on
8 February 1974:
Iof Au's trali" aA wyaesa r toagooe xpmyl aipnr inthcei paclh antgaessk awse wa, , enreew ., m Parkiimneg i1r1inister
Australia's foreign policy in terms of our political inheritence
after twenty-three years of Opposition.
A year later my task is to put the established, firm
and irreversible policy of the Australian Government in terms of
the realities of the international situation we, with all the
countries of the region, now have to live with.
A year ago, it was very necessary, it iw. as quite
inevitable, that a new Government would stress those aspects of
its policies which emphasised its independence from its
p predecessors. Now I emphasise those great matters which
illustrate the inter-dependence of my nation with other nations,
with old friends as much as with new associates.
It's most appropriate that I do so here, to the press,
in Singapore, at this time.
To the press, because, naturally enough, properly
enough, your writings have tended to emphasise sometimes, dare
I say, dramatise the changes more than the continuity of
policies. In Singapore, because I acknowledge that no nation
has been more directly affected by some of our decisions and no
nation is better entitled to a full explanation of the purposes
of the Australian Government. And now, because there has not
been a time since the war itself that the inter-dependence of
all nations, not just the nations of our region, but of all, the
very greatest with the smallest, has been made so vividly manifest-
in all its complexity, all its fragility, all its vulnerability
and in all its urgent reality.
It's no longer necessary, and it was never really
correct, to measure the policies of my Government just by contrast
with those of its predecessor.
Contrast enough I trust there is, but it is a mistake
to see our policies only as a break with the past.
For four reasons. To do so ignores much that continues
and much that would be happening whatever government was in power
in Australia. Secondly, it ignores the steadiness of the
Australian people, and any elected Australian Government ignores
at its peril the determination of the Australian people to protect
their reputation for reliability and dependability. Thirdly, it
ignores the consistency of policy formulation within the Australian
Labor Party. These policies have long been a matter of public record
and public debate. It is just impossible for anybody to have been surprised
by our major decisions unless we were to accept that it is
surprising these days for elected governments to carry out their
undertakings. And fourthly and most importantly, it ignores the
fundamental fact that our policies are directed towards the future,
not against the past.
We are not merely repairing the past; we are preparing
for the future. Sure enough in matters like China, like Viet-Nam, like
Southern Africa, there is in our thinking and attitudes an element
of apology, of reparation. But the great thing is preparation
preparation for a future of unparallelled opportunities with
appalling consequences confronting us all if we fail to grasp
them. And the old attitudes, the old stances, the old frozen
postures were just not adequate for such a preparation.
So it is in the context of the future that I wish
our policies to be seen, because it is in that context that they
are being developed. 
And if you try to see them in that context, you w,, ill
I believe be able to see their consistency and their true meaning.
They are all part of a pattern; it is a pattern for
the future. Basically, what we are trying to do for Australia, and
to the extent that we have any influence over opinion or events
beyond our shores, what we are trying to do in the region, is to
build a range and breadth of relations in order to prevent any
single preoccupation distorting or paralysing our actions and
attitudes. For most of the period that my party was in opposition,
the overwhelming preoccupation of Australian policy was China
arid that meant, of course, the containment of China by military
action on the Asian mainland.
The American alliance, SEATO, the war in Viet-Nam, were
forced into this single focus; all these matters were debated in
terms of that over-riding preoccupation.
It is precisely because my Government rejects the
premise of that preoccupation, precisely because we believe that
the preoccupation to the point of obsession harmed Australia that
we are determined to widen all Australia's relations to prevent
other newer preoccupations doing similar harm.
Yet in acting to redress the past we do not over react
against the past.
Take China itself. You should not get the idea that
because we moved so very promptly to normalise relations with
China after 23 years of mutual hostility that China is the
be-all and end-all of Australia's foreign policy.
It was the classic case of when it is not necessary to
delay it is necessary not to delay.
Again consider our policy towards the United States
because we choose no longer to beat the drum about the alliance,
that is not to say that ANZUS is not still our most important and
I believe enduring treaty.
And the same kind of consideration lay behind our
decisions affecting the Five Power arrangements. 
You should understand that our decision to withdraw
the battalion and battery from Singapore following incidentally
on its withdrawal by our predecessors four years ago from Terendak
is part of a reconstruction and re-orientation of our whole defeunce
policy. In no way do we repudiate or down-grade the Yive Power
arrangements. Those arrangements do not of course require Australia
to maintain a battalion in Singapore.
Ve are convinced that the kind of army Australia necdi
for her own defence and for her raost effective contribution to
defence of her friends should no longer be structured upon the
concept of fixed garrisons overseas.
For a country like Australia the concept is unreal alk
anachronistic. And for Australia it is a concept which cuts across
her basic defence needs in modern times.
Her needs are for highly professional, high mobile,
finely-equipped forces capable of, and experienced in, proipt
cooperation with friendly forces.
This is the concept relevant to our needs.
The old concept worked as an inhibition economicail2
politically and logisticaly against creating the most effective
defence contribution Australia can make.
And I confidently predict that the next two years . ii
see Australian defence cooperation not only with Singapore,
Malaysia, New Zealand and the British presence in the region, btL.-I.
with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea brought to a more effective
and efficient state than could ever have been achieved simply by
keeping Australian ground forces with all their impedimenta
overseas. The desire for cooperation, the need for cooperation
has not changed; all that has changed is the view of the
Australian Government about the best way of achieving that
cooperation and making it more valuable for all of us.
Some components of Australian forces are going home,
but Australia is not going away. 
Ana this, of course, is the very crux of the matter.
I hear in some quarters concern that Australia, or
the present Australian Government. may go isolationist.
Isolationism i~ s not an option for Australia or for
any Australian Government.
Indeed, it was precisely my belief that we were
isolating ourselves from half the world, from a quarter of the
world's people in China, from the whole of Eiack Africa, from the
other half of Europe east of the Elbe, from Latin America and
even from India in any meaningfol way, and my belief that our
relations with Japan and Indonesia lacked their proper warmth
that has informed, inspired and maoulded the policies, actions and
decisions of my Government and which dictated my own overseas
visits and those of my Foreign Miister.
This Government -by action, by association, by
inclination, by philosophy and above all by the necessities of
the times in which we live and the region in which we live is
the most genuinely internationalist government Australia has ever
had. And even if our wishes were different, Australia's own
needs wouid force irnternationalismn upon is
How could this great trading country t; hose lifelines
lie througn here be indifferenit to what happens here?
How could this great resource producer whose prospority
depends upon: the prosper~ ty of the great resource users be
indifferent to their success and well-be. Ing?
Eut we do make the dictinctaon between internationalism
and interventionism. Ve beiieve that the end of the old interventionism is
the beginning of a new internationalism in which Australia will
play a constructivze, cooperative, and generous part.
\ ie know only too well that peace arnd security do not
come because we want them or merely because we proclaim their
desirability. Peace and security have to be built brick by brick
and bonded by the efforts, energy and imagination of the leaders
of this regio. 
Vhenr. people use the phrase Asian problems should be
settled by Asian countrLes they sometimes tend to forget that
the Asian continent does not end where the borders with Communist
Asian couantr: es start.
The present government, in formulating its policy,
does take account of the views of countries like China and, to
a lesser extent, North Viet-Nam and North Korea although,
naturally, it does not take as much account of their views as
those of traditionally fr-: endly countries and geographically
closer countries. Ir. its bilateral relations with some Asian countries
Australia is going through a period of adjustment, but we are
confident that in the longer run, once this adjustment has been
made, our relationships would be more soundly based than in the
past. The confluence of our history and geography, our
origins as Europeans, our location onr the edge of South-East Asiagive
us a unique opportunity to demonstrate to the international
community that countries with very dafferent cultural, religious
and ethnic backgrounds can evolve intimate and lasting friendships.
To this end we shall spare no effort to ensure that in
the years ahead, Australia is accepted as a cooperative and
helpful member of the Asian and Pacif. c region and a neighbour
of the nations of South-East Asia.
The signs of tnis new approacr, are round us in this
region. In ASEAN, Sirngapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand
and the Philippines have and have sustained an organisation which
is workable and relevant, and which reflects the common needs of
the countries of South-East Asia.
Australia applauds the achievements of ASEAN, and
the hope which it offers for the economic and social progress of
the people of the region.
But we have no desire to intrude; I have said many
times before that Australia does not seek membership of ASEAN.
What we do hope is that we can cooperate with ASEAN
imaginatively and constructively as a neighbour and a friend. 
We think we have certain skills to offer if these
skills are needed; we know that we have much, in turn, to learn
from you and your ASEAN partners.
The sort of fruitful cooperation which I have in mind
is illustrated by the recent discussions which Australian
officials held with representatives of ASEAN in Bangkok on
possible Australian assistance to regional ASEAN projects.
The discussions which Prime Minister Lee and I have
held about concluding a cultural agreement between our two
countries an agreement which we both favour in principle and
which we will work quickly towards formulating is a further
indication of our desire to broaden the form and the depth of
our relations with South-East Asian countries.
W~ e know that you in Singapore, your Government and
your business leaders, are looking to extend the fruits of your
own hard-won economic progress to the region as a whole.
We hope that we, in some way, if only in a small way,
can assist as a catalyst in this process.
There are certain fields of endeavour, in agriculture
and technical and scientific training to name but tio, where we
believe we can make a valuable contribution to regional
development. Ny government is not alone in recogniaing the need
for the promise of a new spirit of international cooperation,
and this region is not the only one where nations are attempting
to establish new forms of cooperative relationships, or where
Australia is anxious to assist with that process.
Put to Australia, South-East Asia is, of course, our
immediate north. Your hopes, your problems, your future are necess4arily
and for ever, part of our own future.
Much is written about Australia' s " new nationalism";
I would rather put it in terms of Australia's new internationalism.
Of course, there is a national spirit awake and abroad
in Australia. 
8.
But Australia wants no more for herself than Singapore
wants for herself, and what all the nations in this region are
seeking a national identity within the international community,
reasonable control over our own destiny and our own resources in
a world where all nations are increasingly inter-dependent.
This is now the task exercising statesmanship throughout
the world to reconcile these three desires and needs of the
peoples of the world their desire for independence, their
dependence upon others and our inter-dependence, all of us with
one another. We are living in times when these three great principlesindependence,
dependence, inter-dependence show themselves to be
interlocked as never before.
Upon their resolution and reconciliation depends the future
even the survival of civilisation itself.
You will not, I believe, find Australia with a very strong
sense of her own nationhood and identity, Australia with a very
real sense of the dependence of her prosperity upon the prosperity
of her neighbours, Australia with a very deep sense of her
inter-dependence with and her responsibilities towards the
international community, failing in her responsibilities or
faltering in our determination to make the most of the opportunity
for a better, safer neighbourhood at this very critical time in0
modern history." 



4/ DATE
M/' 2 0 11 February 1974.
PRIME MINISTERS ADDRESS AT STATE DINNER,
KUAL~ A LJUMPUR
The following is an amended text of an address given by the
Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, at a State dinner in his honour in
Kuala Lumpur on 29 January 1974. This text should replace that
issued in our news release number M/ 9 of 29 January 1974:
" It is -thoroughly appropriate that I should have begun my
visit to six countries in the South-East Asian region here, in
Malaysia. I am no stranger to your country.
I come as an old friend as the guest of old friends.
I come as Prime Minister of a nation with a long and
proven friendship towards the people of Malaysia.
I come to re-affirm that friendship and to seek new ways
to strengthen the Cooperation which has existed between our twro
countries for more than two decades.
There is no country in the region which better exemplifiLes
the spirit of national independence and regional cooperation than
your own, I believe further there is no country in the region where
the policies of my own government are better understood and where
the responses and attitudes of our two governments to the changes,
challenges and opportunities in the region are more in harmony.
In this climate olf change, in seeking new solutions to new;
pblems, Malaysia has responded with vigour and imagination.
We Australians have in our own way tried to do the same.,
Our views at so many points coincide, and so do the
interest of our two nations.
In particular, we march in step on three fundamental
matters. ~ J~ WIT 
WVe both believe that the detente between the great poiier,-N
can work, that it must be made to work and that the smaller pol-aers
like Malaysia. and Australia can help to make it . work.
We both believe deeply that this region should not become
the area for confrontation and comnpetition betweec-' n the great
powers. We both believe that regional cooperation and regional
associations have a vital contribution to make to the stability
and prosperity of this region.
It is against this background of shared interests, shared
attitudes and shared aspirations that I wish the policies and
actions of* -the Australian Governient to be seen.
In Australia, we have broadened the range of our international
contacts.
Ve have sought to break doiwn ideological constraints which
had for so long obstructed meaningful relationships with
countries such as China, East Germany and North Viet-Nam.
We have placed our relationships with the United States
and the United Kingdom on the basis of a more mature partnership.
We have widened our horizons and sought great cooperation
with the medium and smaller powers of Africa, Latin America and
the Pacific. We have given our ful. support to all questions of human
rights and declared our opposition to any forms of lingering
colonialism. We have sought to remove any taint of racism from our
national and international policies.
I wish to make it quite clear that our interest in
South East Asia continues undiminished.
Our genuine concern about the well-being of M~ alaysia and
our other neighbours in the region is a central and enduring
feature of Australian foreign policy.
What has changed in our attitude to South East Asia is
not the degree of our interest or of our involvement, but the
nature of that interest and that involvement.
We seek to turn away from the destructive confrontations
of the past to constructive cooperation in the future. 
3.
In the context of our common view, it ' s worthwhile
recalling that some of my Government's earliest decisions brought
us even more in line with the policy of the Malaysian goverrent
After coming to office, we ended our military role in.
Viet-Nam a role which Malaysia did not undertake.
We ended our military assistance previously given to
Cambodia Malaysia had never given such military assistance.
We reduced our involvement with ASPAC an organisation
in which Malaysia no longer participates, and we sought
successfully to change the military emphasis of SEATO an
organisation of which Malaysia was never a member.
My Government has set a new course for Australia in th'is
region. We have shifted the emphasis of our continuing involvement
in South East Asia from one primarily based on ideological
considerations and military alliances to one based increasingly.
on developing trade with the countries of the region, on promoting
progress through constructive aid programs, on encouraging
security through regional cooperation, on a positive response
to the recent proposals that we should consider financial
assistance to agreed ASEAN projects, and on the development of
cultural contacts through the negotiati~ on of cultural agreements
with the countries of South East Asia.
We see in this re-orientation of our diplomatic efforts
the opportunity, which has been too often missed or ignored in
the past, to establish endu. ring relationships with the countries
of this region0
It is not our wish to forge ties based on transitory
concerns but to seek out ways of developing bonds based on an
identification of those interests -which will continue
irrespective of the governments in power in Australia. or the
region. Our main endeavours will henceforth be directed towards
expanding relations in those fields most likely to produce lasting
social and economic advantages for both us and our neighbours. 
Some manifestations of this change are already evident.
In recent months we have joined IVDSEA, The Ministerial
Conference for the Economic Development of South East Asia.
Only yesterday in B3angkok we were proclaimed an associate
member of SEAYEG, The South East Asian Ministers of Education
Organisation. Earlier this month we met for the first time with the
Secretaries-General of ASEAI to discuss ways in which Australia
might assist ASEAN projects.
I stress that isolationism is not a policy option . fbr
Australia. Ve are going through a period of change and adjus-tent
which I believe will resulIt in more fruitful Australian
involvement than ever before with the countries of South East Asia.
In this re-orientation I would stress that we have not
sought to widen our interests and contacts at the expense of
older friendships. And this applies with special force to Malaysia and
the ASEAN nations.
For too long our interests in this region were seen
excessively in terms of defence.
We do not now look on the countries of South East Asia
as buffer states or as constituting some northern Military line
where some potential future enemy of Australia should be held.
Rather, we see these countries, especially Malaysia,
Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, as countries
which have a common interest with Australia and New Zealand in
consolidating the security and stability of this region as a
whole. In particular we seek close relations with the Commonwealth
nations in South East Asia and the Pacific and Indian Ocean areas.
Australia's own defence capability is enhanced by mutual
defence arrangements.
My Government gave a pledge to the Australian people to
honour the full terms of the Five Power Arrangements until a more
positive and enduring settlement is reached in establishing peace,
freedom and neutrality in this region. 
I SAustralian Air Force Squadrons will. I remoin at Butterworth
as long as they r elevant to the needs of both our nations
and relevant to the realities of the region.
This is a matter which, in consultation with your
government, we shall review as appr opriate.
Our defence association is only on aspect o f the relations
between our two nations and our two peoples.
We have our longstanding common bond through our membership
of the Commonwealth.
We have increasingly fruitful cooperation at the United
Nations and the Australian Government now, as a matter of policy,
consults closely with the countries of South East Asia before
determining our position at the United Nations.
A glance at our voting patterns in the United Nations will
show that since December 1972 we have voted together to a much
greater extent than ever before.
We have at present over. 6000 Malaysian students in
Australia, many of whom have enriched our culture and widened our
perspectives. Others who have returned occupy prominent positions in
your Goverrment and Public Service.
This exchange can only strengthen the understanding of a
friendship for each country in the other.
Trade and Australian investment in Malaysia have developed
rapidly. Only a week ago I arnounced a new Australian policy on
Australian investment overseas, especially in developing
countries. We want to encourage private Australian investment on a
joint venture basis in Mlalaysia in a way which will benefit the
people of Malaysia and will be favourable to the ownership and
control of enterprises by Malaysians.
We understand and accept the wish of developing countries
to regulate foreign investment in accordance with their own
national aspiratLons and development plans.
We seek no less for ourselves and we see Australian
investment overseas in the context of mutual benefit and of
economic cooperatio~ n without exploitationø 
Recently the number of Australian tourists visiting Malaysia
has increased greatly.
There has also been a rapid growth in the cultural exchanges
between our two countries.
This is a matter which I believe worthy of further active
encouragement. I believe that these programs of exchange between peoples
and cultures have an increasingly greater part to play in
developing a wider, enduring understanding between peoples and
cultures have an increasingly greater part to play in developing
a wider, enduring understanding between neighbours with different
cultural backgrounds.
Let us freely acknowledge the differences in culture, but
let us learn more about each other and from each other.
All these links have contributed to a high level of
awareness and understanding of each other.
W~ e, in Australia, have been impressed by the economic
success of Malaysia.
I note that in your recent mid-term r eview of the second
Malaysia plan you have not only achieved, but have exceeded, your
growth target. The importance of economic success is absolute because
only with economic progress will there be social advancement and
regional stability.
I do not, however, wish to comment only on Malaysia's
contribution to the economic development of the region.
If anything in the past few years we have watched with
even greater admiration the way Malaysia has evolved her foreign.
policies to match the changed realities of the area.
Malaysia has, along with Indonesia, the Philippines,
Singapore and Thailand, established a workable, relevant and
important regional grouping ASEAN.
ASEA14 is an example to all of us of the co-operation and
understanding which can be achieved if countries with a common
interest in progress come together to promote that common interest.
Malaysia has also used that forum to advance its concept
of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. 
Australia applauds this initiative and welcomes the
objectives which the ASEAN countries have set for themselves for
a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South East Asia.
It is a creative concept which, if fulfilled, will not
only benefit the nations in the zone, it will itself be a further
step towards detente, if the great powers are able to agree not to
use this region as the field for destructive rivalry.
You have acknowledgethat the zone of peace, freedom
and neutrality will not be achieved overnight.
It is evident that the great powers will need to show
more trust towards each other before they will come to a point
when they can agree mutually to accept the zone.
The search for detente has begun and I believe the
realisation will grow that it is only the imaginative farsightedness
of such new initiatives which will enable our world to
attain the peace and justice we all desire.
In the same spirit of hope but with the swuae awareness of
the difficulties in the way, my Government has suggested that
some wider' regional arrangement for information consultation
between the nations of the whole region should be established
in the future.
We consider that it is important that the countries of
the Asian and Pacific region should be able to come together to
discuss common interests in an atmosphere free of crisis, free
of pomp, free of drama, and free of excessive expectations of
any spectacular results.
I recognise that such a forum cannot be achieved quickly,
it has to evolve from withIn the region, out of the wishes of
the countries of the region.
Like the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, it will
only come about when the countries concerned agree that it is in
their mutual interests to have such a forum.
Lest there be any misunderstandings, I want to emphasise
that we do not see such an association competing with ASEAN in
any way* On the contrary, we would see it as being complementsry to
ASEAN which has proved itself to be a close viable and natural
grouping of South East Asian states. 
Malaysia and Australia are both moving in the same general
direction and, with the benefit of our long-standing friendship
and understanding, we should, by working together, make our goals
that much more capable of achievement.
1We share the same great goals.
Wie are marching together towards them.
In some matters, such as normalisation of relations with
China, Australia has been able to move more quickly than Malaysia0
In others, such as the establishment of relations with
North Korea, Mvalaysia has moved more quickly than Australia.
This has been ' because of differences in our circumstances
rather than differences in our ultimate goals.
We are each involved in our own way in an important
humanitarian experiment.
You, within Malaysia, are trying to forge a free,
prosperous and harmonious multi-racial society.
We, in AustGralia, notwithstanding our European origins,
are trying to build strong bridges and develop lasting links with
Malaysia and the countries of South East Asia.
But we both seek, I believe, the same end, namely to
cooperate closely, as good neighbours should, in a wider
effort to promote a stable, more prosperous and peaceful
multi-racial South East Asian region.
When one sees the severity of the test which the detente
much undergo, as shown so suddenly and dangerously in the
Middle East when one sees the continuing frustration. of our high
hopes just one year ago for real peace in Indo-China, it would
be an exceptionally bold or excessively naive man who declares
his unqualified optimism about the course of events and their
outcome. Yet, fundamentally, I am an optimist, certainly about the
future of our region.
Diplomacy must be based on realistic hopes rather than on
resignation and despair.
And from no country in the region, from the effectiveness
of its Government, the growing prosperity of its people, and the
imaginative policies of its leaders, do I draw more encouragement
sustain that opt~ imism and that hope than I do from Malaysia. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM, 0l. C., AT
THE OPENING OF THE SOCIETY OF ST, VINCENT DE PAULO " OZANAM" HOME OF
PEACE AND CONTENTMENT, CAMPBELL, A. C. T. 14 FEBRUARY 1974
I AM ESPECIALLY PLEASED ON THE DAY AFTER MY RETURN FROM
SOUTH-EAST ASIA TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE LAUNCHING OF A NEW
ENTERPRISE OF THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY. FOR AMONG THE VERY
WIDE RANGE OF ITS ACTIVITIES, THE SOCIETY HAS INCLUDED TRAINING
PROGRAMS AND MATERIAL ASSISTANCE IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA. UNDOUBTEDLY,
SINCE ITS FOUNDATION BY A GROUP OF STUDENTS 141 YEARS AGO, THE
SOCIETY HAS CARRIED ITS WORK AMONG THE POOR INTO AS MANY AREAS
AS POSSIBLE. THE SOCIETY'S WORK AMONG THE HOMELESSo THE YOUNG,
THE HANDICAPPED AND THE DISADVANTAGED, BOTH IN AUSTRALIA AND
OVERSEAS, TESTIFIES TO THE VIGOUR WITH WHICH THE PRINCIPLES SET
By FREDERICK OZANAM ONE OF THE GREAT CATHOLICS OF THE LAST 2oo
YEARS ARE BEING PURSUED.
THE NAME YOU HAVE CHOSEN FOR YOUR LATEST ENTERPRISE,
A NEW AGED PERSONS HOSTEL1 IS THEREFORE PARTICULARLY APPROPRIATE.
AND YOUR POLICY OF ADMITTING AGED PEOPLE ' TO THIS HOME ON THE BASIS
OF NEED IS IN LINE WITH THE HIGHEST IDEALS OF THE FOUNDER OF THE
SOCIETY. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS HAPPY TO HAVE BEEN
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS ENDEAVOUR. CLEARLY THE 1297,000 WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAS PROVIDED UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTELS ACT HAS
BEEN WELL DIRECTED.
ANOTHER SOURCE OF PLEASURE FOR ME IS TO SEE THAT, IN
ESTABLISHING THIS HOSTEL, THE SOCIETY HAS SHOWN A FULL AWARENESS
FOR A MODERN APPROACH TO HOUSING FOR THE AGED. THE BREAKDOWN
OF THE TRADITIONAL THREE-GENERATION FAMILY UNIT THROUGHOUT THE
WESTERN WORLD AND ITS REPLACEMENT BY THE SO-CALLED " 1NUCLEAR FAMILY" I 
-2-
HAS CREATED AN ENORMOUS PROBLEM WITH THE CARE OF THE AGED.
FOR TOO LONG THE PROBLEM WAS DEALT WITH BY PROVIDING ONLY ONE
CHOICE THE NURSING HOME FOR AGED PEOPLE WHO DID NOT HAVE
THEIR OWN HOME OR WHO COULD NO LONGER LIVE THERE. THIS FORCED
MANY AGED PEOPLE INTO A STYLE. OF ACCOMMODATION WHICH WAS NOT
APPROPRIATE TO THEIR NEEDS. MIANY OLD PEOPLE WHO WERE FIT AND
WILLING TO PARTICIPATE ACTIVELY IN THE SOCIETY AROUND THEM HAD
TO LIVE IN INSTITUTIONS WHICH WERE INTENDED FOR PEOPLE WHO WERE
LESS PHYSICALLY AND MENTALLY CAPABLE.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CARE
OF THE AGED IN RECENT YEARS HAS BEEN THE GROWING EMPHASIS ON
PROVIDING OTHER CHOICES FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE. THE GOVERNMENT
ACTIVELY SUPPORTS AN APPROACH BASED ON HAVING THREE TYPES OF
ACCOMMODATION PROVIDED FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE WHO NO LONGER CAN STAY
AT HOME. WE WANT TO SEE THESE PEOPLE BE ABLE TO CHOOSE BETWEEN
SELF-CONTAINED UNITS, HOSTEL-TYPE HOMES AND, ONLY WHERE THIS IS
MEDICALLY NECESSARY, NURSING HOMES. THE CREATION OF HOSTEL-TYPE
ACCOMMODATION HERE IN CAMPBELL BY THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL
SOCIETY FULLY ACCORDS WITH THIS THREE-TIERED APPROACH.
M1UCH REMAINS TO BE DONE IN THIS AREA, EVEN NOW IT HAS
BEEN ESTIMATED THAT ABOUT 25 PER CENT OF PEOPLE CURRENTLY IN
NURSING HOMES SHOULD NOT BE THERE. WE MUST EXPLORE QUICKLY AND
VIGOROUSLY ALL POSSIBLE MEANS OF PROVIDING OTHER CHOICES FOR THE
AGED. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE LAST YEAR HAS TAKEN
SEVERAL IMPORTANT STEPS TO REVIEW AND REVISE THE APPROACH TO
AGED PERSONS HOUSING. THE NEWLY ESTABLISHED SOCIAL FELFARE
COMMISSION APPOINTED A COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO AGED PERSONS 
-3-
HOUSING IN JUNE 1973 AND IT GAVE AN INTERIM REPORT TO THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY AT THE END OF NOVEMBER, IN KEEPING WITH THE
GOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF MAKING DOCUMENTS OF THIS KIND PUBLIC, THE
INTERIM REPORT WAS PROMPTLY TABLED IN FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, IT MADE
A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT RECOMMENDATIONS, PARTICULARLY RELATING TO
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES, I EXPECT THAT CABINET WILL CONSIDER THE
REPORT AND MAKE A DECISION ON THESE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE NEXT
FEW WEEKS, MEANWHILE THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY WILL
CONTINUE AND I WOULD DRAW SPECIAL ATTENTION TO THE FACT THAT
ONE OF ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE IS TO INQUIRE INTO ITHE NEED FOR
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO INTRODUCE ANY ALTERNATIVE OR ADDITIONAL
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE FOR THE HOUSING AND CARE OF THE
AGED, IN ADDITION TO THIS COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY, THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MYR HAYDEN, EARLY LAST YEAR ASKED A STANDING
COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH AND IEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
TO INQUIRE INTO AND REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF GERIATRIC CARE
GENERALLY IN AUSTRALIA, THE COMMITTEE HAS BEEN MEETING REGULARLY
UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF DR DAVID DE SOUZA, AN EXPERT IN THE FIELD
OF GERIATRIC CARE, THE COMMITTEE IS EXPECTED TO REPORT TO MR HAYDEN
VERY SOON, ON ANOTHER FRONT, THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING, MR JOHNSON,
HAS ASKED THE STATISTICIAN TO CONDUCT A NATION-WIDE SURVEY OF
AGED PERSONS' HOUSING NEEDS, IN ASKING FOR THE SURVEY MR JOHNSON
DECLARED THAT THE STUDY WAS NECESSARY IF EFFECTIVE ACTION WAS TO
BE TAKEN TO SOLVE THE GRAVE HOUSING PROBLEMS NOW CONFRONTING MANY
AGED PERSONS, ESPECIALLY PENSIONERS, THE SURVEY IS SCHEDULED TO
BEGIN IN DECEMBER THIS YEAR, 
THESE INVESTIGATIONS ARE NEEDED TO ENSURE THAT COMMUNITY
ACTIVITY IN THIS AREA IS APPROPRIATE TO THE NEEDS OF OUR SENIOR
CITIZENS. THE GOVERNMENT, HOWEVER, HAS NOT BEEN CONTENT TO DO NOTHING
FRESH WHILE IT AWAITS THE RESULTS OF THE STUDIES, IT HAS TAKEN
ACTION TO MAKE MORE MONEY AVAILABLE FOR AGED PERSONS HOUSING AND
FOR DOMICILIARY CARE FOR THE AGED, IN MARCH LAST YEAR IT ANNOUNCED
THAT PEOPLE CARING FOR SICK AGED RELATIVES IN NEED OF NURSING CARE
IN THEIR OWN HOMES WOULD BECOME ELIGIBLE FOR A 814 A WEEK GOVERNMENT
GRANT. IT HAS ENACTED AN AGED PERSONS HOMES BILL WHICH INCREASED
FROM 810 TO S12 A WEEK THE RATE OF SUBSIDY PAID TO ELIGIBLE
ORGANISATIONS WHICH PROVIDE PERSONAL CARE SERVICES FOR THE AGED
IN HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION,
TWO OTHER GOVERNMENT ACTIONS LAST YEAR WERE DIRECTED
TO THE NEED FOR IMPROVING HOME CARE FACILITIES FOR THE AGED.
THE DELIVERED MEALS SUBSIDY BILL WAS ENACTED TO INCREASE THE BASIC
RATE OF SUBSIDY PAID TO ".' lEALS-ON-' HEELS" SERVICES FROM 15 CENTS
TO 20 CENTS PER MEAL. THEN THE STATES GRANTS ( HOME CARE) BILL WAS
BROUGHT IN TO INFUSE EXTRA FUNDS INTO THE PRESENT HOME CARE
PROGRAM., THE BILL INCREASED THE GOVERNMENT'S GRANTS TO THE STATES
FROM A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BASIS TO 92 FOR EVERY õ 1 SPENT BY THE
STATES ON HOUSEKEEPER AND HOME HEALTH SERVICES AND SENIOR CITIZEN
CENTRES. IT ALSO INCREASED THE SUBSIDY FOR WELFARE OFFICERS
EMPLOYED FOR SENIOR CITIZEN CENTRES FROM HALF TO TWO-THIRDS OF
THEIR SALARY. 
THE GOVERNMENT'S AIM WITH ALL OF THESE ACTIONS IS TO
ENSURE THAT ALL AGED PEOPLE THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA CAN LIVE IN
COMFORT AND DIGNITY AND THAT ALL AGED PEOPLE CAN SPEND THEIR
TIME IN AN INTERESTING AND STIMULATING ENVIRONMENT.
TO ACHIEVE THIS AIM WE MUST ENSURE THAT WE ALLOW-J FOR T1HE
UTMOST FLEXIBILITY IN THE CARE OF THE AGED. 1! IE BELIEVE THAT, IF
AT ALL POSSIBLE, AGED PEOPLE SHOULD BE ABLE TO LIVE IN THEIR
OWN HOMES AND MUCH OF OUR ACTIVITY WILL BE DIRECTED TOWARDS THIS
END. VIE HOPE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN WILL PROVIDE A
FRAMEWORK FOR THIS. THiE PLAN, WHICH AIMS TO ASSIST IN THE
DEVELOPMENT AT A REGIONAL LEVEL OF NATIONALLY CO-ORDINATED
WELFARE ACTIVITY, WILL PROVIDE FOR COST SHARING WITH LOCAL
AUTHORITIES AND VOLUNTARY AGENCIES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF WELFARE
SERVICES. HOPE THAT THE PLAN WILL ENABLE GREATER ATTENTION TO
BE PAID TO HOME VISITING AND OTHER DOMICILIARY CARE SO THAT ELDERLY
PEOPLE CAN REMAIN IN THEIR OWN HOM1ES FOR AS LONG AS POSSIRLE.
THE GOVERNMENT IS ALSO EXAMiINING THE POSSIRILITY OF ESTABLISliING
DAY CARE CENTRES TO WHICH AGED PEOPLE WOULD GO FOR M1EDICAL
TREATMENT AND SERVICES, SUCH AS CHIROPODY, WHILE LIVING AT HOME.
THIS CONCEPT HAS THE ADDITIONAL ADVANTAGE THAT IT WOULD OFFER THE
POSSIBILITY OF REGULAR AND WIDE-RANGING SOCIAL CONTACT FOR
ELDERLY PEOPLE. 
-6-
WHETHER THE AGED LIVE AT HOME OR IN HOSTELS OR IN NURSING
HOMES, IT IS BECOMING INCREASINGLY OBVIOUS THAT WE MUST DO ALL THAT
WE CAN TO PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THEM TO REMAIN INVOLVED IN THE
COMMUNITY AROUND THEM, THIS NEED IS FREQUENTLY OVERLOOKED AND
A KIND OF GERIATRIC APARTHEID HAS RESULTED. THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES
THAT WE MUST EXPLORE ALL POSSIBILITIES FOR WIDE-RANGING SOCIAL
CONTACT AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT FOR THE AGED. AS AN EXAMPLE, MR HAYDEN
HAS ASKED THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION TO LOOK AT THE POSSIBILITY
OF SENIOR CITIZEN CENTRES BEING USED AS A BASIS FOR DAY CARE SERVICES.
THIS WOULD ENABLE AGED PEOPLE TO LOOK AFTER CHILDREN WITH WHOM THEY
COULD DEVELOP A CLOSE RELATIONSHIP.
I AM SURE THAT THE SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SHARES
ALL OF THESE AIMS AND IDEALS. THROUGHOUT ITS HISTORY IT HAS
EMPHASISED THE NEED FOR PERSONAL CONTACT BETWEEN ITS WORKERS AND
THE PEOPLE WITH WHOM THEY ARE INVOLVED.
AGED PERSONS HOUSING AND DOMICILIARY CARE WILL NOT, OF
COURSE, BY THEMSELVES SATISFY OUR AIM OF ENSURING A COMFORTABLE
AND DIGNIFIED LIFE FOR THE AGED. THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING THE LOT OF ELDERLY PEOPLE IN OTHER WAYS, PARTICULARLY
IN FINANCIAL TERMS. ON THE SECOND DAY OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE
NEWLY ELECTED PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR A BILL WAS INTRODUCED TO INCREASE
PENSIONS BY $ 1.50 A WEEK. PAYMENT OF THE PENSION INCREASE WAS
MADE RETROSPECTIVE TO THE FIRST PAY DAY AFTER THE 1972 ELECTIONS.
THE BUDGET PROVIDED FOR A FURTHER INCREASE OF $ 1.50 A WEEK IN
PENSIONS IN THE SPRING. THESE TWO INCREASES HAVE MEANT THAT WITHIN
A YEAR PENSIONS HAVE RISEN BY 15 PER CENT, WHICH HAS ALLOWED THEM
TO KEEP AHEAD OF INFLATION. 
14E HAVE CONSTANTLY RE-AFFIRMED r) IhR INTENTION TO LIFT
PENSIONS To 25 PER CENT OF AVERAGE WEEKLY MALE EARNINGS. IN KEEPING
WITH THIS AIM WE HAVE ALSO REPEATED OUR PLEDGE TO INCREASE PENSIONS
EACH SPRING AND AUTUMN UNTIL THIS LEVEL IS REACHED.
IN ADDITION TO THESE INCREASES, THE GOVERNMENT IS MOVING
TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST ON AGE PENSIONS. THE FIRST
STEP TOWARDS THIS OBJECTIVE WAS TAKEN IN THE BUDGET WITH THE ABOLITION
OF THE MEANS TEST FOR ALL PEOPLE AGED 75 OR MORE. ANOTHER STEP WILL
BE TAKEN IN THIS YEAR'IS BUDGET.
IN THIS CONTEXT OF LIBERALISATION I WOULD ALSO MENTION
A MEASURE OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE TO ELDERLY CITIZENS WHO HAVE
COME To AUSTRALIA FROM OTHER COUNTRIES. THE NATIONAL PARLIAMFNT
ENACTED LAST YEARl A BILL WHICH MAKES AVAILABLE AGE AND SOME OTHER
PENSIONS To AUSTRALIAN PENSIONERS WHO WISH TO LIVE IN ANY OTHEP
COUNTRY. NO LONGER WILL AN AGED PERSON WHO HAS WORKED HARD IN
AUSTRALI. A LOSE THE SOCIAL SERVICE FRUITS OF HIS LABOUR SIMPLY BECAUSE
HE WANTS TO SPEND HIS LAST YEARS IN HIS COUNTRY OF ORIGIN.
IN ALL THAT IT IS DOING, THE GOVERNMENT AIMS TO OVERCOME
THE DISADVANTAGES AND INEQUALITIES THAT TOO MANY AGED PEOPLE HAVE
SUFFERED IN THE PAST IN AUSTRALIA. BELIEVE THAT WITH PROPER
PLANNING AND ADEQUATE SPENDING WE CAN ERADICATE THE WORST OF THE
INEQUALITIES THAT AT PRESENT EXIST. WE BELIEVE THAT, BY CO-OPERATING
WITH VOLUNTARY AGENCIES SUCH AS THE SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL,
WE CAN ENABLE AGED PEOPLE TO HAVE THE DIGNITY AND COMFORT WHICH IS
THEIR RIGHT. WE APPLAUD ALL THAT YOUR SOCIETY HAS ACHIEVED IN THE PAST
AND WE KNOW4 WE CAN COUNT ON YOUR CO-OPERATION IN THE FUTURE. 



THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFERE14DUM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MIiISTER,
THE HON, E. G, ' HITLA1, M. P.,
TO THE 1971' CONFEREACE OF
THE 111STITUTE OF IUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION,
( RAYMOND WEST ORATIOi)
MELBOURNE, 19 FEBRUARY 1974,
I SHOULD BEGIN BY EMPHASISING THE PROFOUND
COMMUNITY OF INTEREST BETWEEN THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF
YOUR INSTITUTE AND THE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES OF MY
GOVERNMENT. YOUR ORGANISATION WAS AMONG THE FIRST TO
RECOGNISE THAT MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION IS AS MUCH A
NATIONAL AS A STATE OR LOCAL CONCERN. YOU WERE AMONG
THE FIRST TO PERCEIVE THAT THE PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE NATIONAL IMPLICATIONS QUITE
DISTINCT FROM THEIR RELEVANCE TO PARTICULAR LOCALITIES.
WHEN YOUR INSTITUTE WAS ESTABLISHED ON A FEDERAL BASIS IN
1952, YOU CONCLUDED TO USE YOUR OWN WORDS THAT " WHILE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS LOCAL AND, IN FACT, DERIVES ITS FUNCTIONS
FROM EACH RESPECTIVE STATE', THE DEVELOPMENT AND STRENGTH OF IT
IS A MATTER OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE AND OF NATIONAL CONCERN." I @/ 2 
2
YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF THAT PRINCIPLE WITH WHAT I
BELIEVE ARE ITS INEVITABLE CONSEQUENCES WAS DUE IN LARGE
MEASURE TO THE VISION AND ENERGY OF THE LATE RAYMOND WEST,
AN ADMINISTRATOR OF EXCEPTIONAL GIFTS AND RARE DEDICATION.
I MIGHT REMIND YOU THAT IT WAS IN THAT SAME YEAR, 1952,
THAT I FIRST ENTERED PARLIAMENT. FROM THAT MOMENT,
IN ALL MY SPEECHES, IN ALL MY ACTIONS, I SOUGHT TO
PERSUADE MY COLLEAGUES AND MY PARTY THAT THE FUTURE OF
SO MANY OF OUR INSTITUTIONS AND SERVICES HEALTH,
TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, HOUSING, ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS,
CHILD CARE, ALL THE THINGS THAT MAKE FOR THE BETTERMENT
AND HAPPINESS OF OUR PEOPLE DEPENDED ON STRONG LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND A MEASURE OF NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. So I APPLAUD WHAT YOUR INSTITUTE
STANDS FOR. YOU ARE DEDICATED TO BETTER AND MORE
EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT; SO AM I, YOU PERCEIVE THE
NATIONAL IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT; SO DO WE.
YOU BELIEVE THAT SOUND LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS FUNDAMENTAL
TO THE WELL BEING OF OUR PEOPLE; SO DO WE. .1/ 3 
3
ONE IN FACT KJO'. S LETTER THAN YOU TIE LONG
AND SORRY HISTORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THIS COUNTRY, THE
YEARS OF NEGLECT AND INDIFFERENCE FRCii WHICH IT HAS
SUFFERED, AND THE ATMOSPHERE OF PERPETUAL FINAINCIAL
CRISIS THAT HAS SURROUNDED IT FOR GENERATIONS. I HAVE
OFTEN MARVELLED AT THE DEDICATION AND FORTITUDE OF MEN
WHO HAVE CONTINUED TO SERVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE FACE
OF SUCH ODDS,. So LET ME PUT TO YOU SOME PROPOSITIONS
WHICH ARE CENTRAL TO MY GOVERNMENT'S WHOLE APPROACH TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND WHICH I BELIEVE WILL HAVE YOUR
ASSENT AS THE MEN AND WOMEN MOST CONCERNED, AND EXPERT,
IN THIS FIELD. PMY FIRST PROPOSITION 13 THAT NO ONE,
WHATEVER HIS PARTY, WHATEVER HIS BELIEFS, CAN BE SATISFIED
WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS IT IS. BASICALLY THIS IS A
QUESTION OF THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
OUTSTRIPPING ITS MEANS. LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS CALLED
UPON TO PROVIDE MORE AND MORE SERVICES TO MORE AND
MORE PEOPLE. THIS IS NOT SOMETHING IT HAS SOUGHT
FOR ITSELF; IT IS SOMETHING DEMANDED BY THE PEOPLE.
AND THE RESOURCES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARE MANIFESTLY
INADEQUATE TO MEET THOSE DEMANDS. / 4 
i'
1IY SECOND PROPOSITION IS THAT FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGES ARE NEEDED TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROPER ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. FOR THAT REASON
WE PROPOSE, AS YOU KNOW, TO ASK THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
TO APPROVE A CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT THAT WILL REMOVE,
ONCE AND FOR ALL, THE PRESENT FINANCIAL PARRIERS TO
EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS FULL AND EFFECTIVE
PARTNERSHIP IN A FEDERAL SYSTEM.
AND MY THIRD PROPOSITION IS THAT UNLESS THAT
REFERENDUM IS CARRIED, UNLESS IT IS SUPPORTED BY ALL ' WHO
HAVE THE TRUE INTERESTS OF LOCAL GOVERINENT AT HEART,
UNLESS IT HAS THE VIGOROUS WORKING SUPPORT OF MEN SUCH
AS YOU, LOCAL GOVERNMENT WILL BE CONFINED FOR FURTHER
GENERATIONS IN ITS PRESENT STRAITJACKET OF STAGNATION
AND IMPOVERISHMENT. / s. 1 
I DO NOT THINK WE CAN APPROACH THIS QUESTION
RATIONALLY UNTIL WE CLEAR OUR MINDS OF IRRELEVANT CANT
PHRASES AND TIRED SLOGANS ABOUT " CENTRALISM" AND " STATE
RIGHTS". I CONFESS THAT I FIND IT STRANGE THAT A
GOVERNMENT SUCH AS MINE, DEDICATED NOT ONLY TO THE
GROWTH BUT TO THE GREATER AUTONOMY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
SHOULD BE ACCUSED OF CENTRALISM ON THAT SCORE.
THE VERY REVERSE IS TRUE. ' HAT WE SEEK TO DO IS
LIBERATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FROM ITS FORCED DEPENDENCE
ON STATE ADMINISTRATIONS THAT CANNOT GIVE IT THE
RESOURCES IT NEEDS. ARE NOT SEEKING TO DENY
EITHER POWER OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO THE STATES.
WHAT WE ARE SEEKING IS A PROPER AND RATIONAL BALANCE
BETWEEN THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT NATIONAL,
STATE AND LOCAL THAT WILL ENABLE EACH TO FUNCTION
EFFICIENTLY AND DISCHARGE ITS RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE
FULL. 
r
S-UJ
IN THIS CONTEXT I SHOULD LIKE TO RECALL TO YOU
SOME WORDS USED BY AR JUSTICE ELSE MITCHELL, CHAIRMAN OF
THE ROYAL COMMISSION INTO NEW SOUTH 4ALES LAND VALUATION
RATING SYSTEMS IN 1965. HE SAID: " PRESENT CENTRALISED
POLICIES, WHICH HAVE REDUCED LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO A STATE
OF VASSALAGE AND COUNCILS TO THE ROLE OF MENDICANTS,
NEED DRASTIC REAPPRAISEMENT, THOUGH I WONDER IF STATE
GOVERNMENTS ARE VERY ANXIOUS FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO
GAIN ANY SUBSTANTIAL MEASURE OF FINANCIAL INDEPENDENCE
OR TO DEVELOP QUALITIES OF STRONG LOCAL AUTONOMY."
HIS HONOUR HIGHLIGHTED A FACT THAT IS FREQUENTLY
OVERLOOKED WHEN ACCUSATIONS OF " CENTRALISM" ARE BANDIED
AROUND. AND IT IS THIS: WITHIN THEIR OWN BORDERS
THE STATES TEND TO BE MUCH MORE CENTRALIST AND
CENTRALISED THAN CANBERRA HAS EVER ASPIRED TO BE
WITHIN THE CONTINENT. / 7 
7
THIS HAS BEEN SO SINCE LONG BEFORE FEDERATION.
ONE HAS ONLY TO REMEMBER THAT THE MAINLAND COLONIES,,
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF . UEENSLAND, BUILT THEIR RAILWAY
SYSTEMS TO ENSURE CENTRALISATION UPON THEIR CAPITAL CITIES.
WHY SHOULD CENTRALISM, SO CALLED, BE LESS BANEFUL WHEN
PRACTISED BY A STATE GOVERNMENT THAN WHEN PRACTISED BY
THE COMMONWEALTH? IT IS ABSURD TO SUPPOSE THAT COMMUNITIES
SUCH AS SHEPPARTON OR ARMIDALE, FOR EXAMPLE, SHOULD FEEL
ANY GREATER KINSHIP WITH MIELBOURNE OR SYDNEY THAN THEY
DO WITH CANBERRA. IT IS ABSURD TO IMAGINE THAT THERE IS
SOME NATURAL LOGIC IN A SITUATION THAT REQUIRES A SEWERAGE
PROGRAM IN BOURKE OR A ROAD PROGRAM IN GEELONG TO RE LY ON,
THE BENEVOLENCE OF MACQUARIE STREET OR SPRING STREET.
WHAT MAGIC FORMULA DO THE STATES POSSESS FOR R EDUCING
INEQUALITIES WITHIN THEIR OWN BOUNDARIES? OUR WHOLE
HISTORY HAS SHOWN THAT THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
WITHIN THE STATES ARE AT LEAST AS GREAT AS THOSE BETWEEN
THE STATES THEMSELVES. IN EACH STATE THERE ARE REGIONS AND
DISTRICTS WHICH CANNOT, BY REASONABLE EFFORT, FUNCTION ON
THE STANDARD OF OTHER REG! ONS AND DISTRICTS. IT IS NO0 ANSWER
TO THESE PROBLEMS, THESE INHERENT AND CHRONIC INEQUALITIES,
TO ARGUE ABOUT STATE RIGHTS. IT IS NOT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
BUT STATE GOVERNMENTS WHICH HAVE CENTRALISED LOCAL GOVERNMElJT.
IT IS UNDER STATE GOVERNMENTS THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS
STAGNATED AND DECLINED. W4HAT I ASK YOU TO DO IS LOOIK AFRESH
AT THESE PROBLEMS, TO START FROM THE BASIC ASSUMPTION THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST BE GIVEN THE RESOURCES TO DO ITS JOB,
AND TO IGNORE THESE FUTILE AND IRRELEVANT ARGUMENTS ABOUT
RIGHTS AND AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY. I 1 / 13 
8
I THINK I CAN BEST DISPOSE OF THE CENTRALIST
RED HERRING BY REFERRING TO SOME REMARKS I MADE IN
NOVEMBER 1971 AT A SEMINAR ON THE FUTURE OF FEDERALISM
AT THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY. YOU WILL SEE
THE CONSISTENCY OF MY PARTY'S APPROACH, AND MY GOVERNMENT'S
APPROACH, TO THESE QUESTIONS, I SAID: " THE FUTURE
OF AUSTRALIAN FEDERALISM DEPENDS FAR MORE UPON
MUNICIPALITIES THAN UPON THE COMMONWEALTH OR THE STATES.
FEDERALISM IS THREATENED NOT BY THE DRIFT OF ' POWER FROM
STATE CAPITALS TO CANBERRA BUT BY THE STATES IMPOSING
UPON MUNICIPALITIES FUNCTIONS WHICH ARE BEYOND THEIR
MEANS. IT IS NOT THE COMMONWEALTH BUT THE STATES WHICH
MUST RESIST OR FEAR A REASSESSMENT OF FUNCTIONS IN OUR
FEDERATION, FOR THE STATES TREAT MUNICIPALITIES EVEN MORE
FRUGALLY THAN THE STATES CLAIM THAT THEY THEMSELVES ARE
TREATED BY THE COMMONWEALTH." THAT WAS OUR POSITION
BEFORE THE ELECTION; IT IS OUR POSITION TODAY, ALL OUR
POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TO ACHIEVING THOSE AIMS, TO
ELEVATING THE STATUS AND IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM. FAR FROM ADVOCATING CENTRALISM
OR CONCENTRATION OF POWER, I BELIEVE THERE IS A PRESSING CASE
FOR DECENTRALISATION OF AUTHORITY SO THAT MANY GOVERNMENT
FUNCTIONS IN CRITICAL AREAS, SUCH AS WELFARE, CULTURE AND
THE ENVIRONMENT, WILL BE PERFORMED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES EQUIPPED WITH THE RESOURCES THEY NEED. / 9 
IE SHOULD NEVER, FORGET THE DISGRACEFUL WAY L-OCAL
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SIN4CE TlF! E
VERY BEGINNINGS OF OUR FEDERATION. ANYONE LOOKING BACK
ON THlE HISTORY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST FIND IT INEXPLICABLE
TODAY THAT THE FRAHERS OF THE CONSTITUTION MADE NO MENTION
OF LOCAL GOVERN4MEN4T AT ALL. AS LATE AS 1927, WHEN THE
FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN'THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE
STATES WAS DRAWN UP, LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS STILL IGNORED.
IF THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT WERE BEING DRAWN UP TODAY IT IS
INCONCEIVABLE THAT THESE AUTHIORITIES WOULD BE OVERLOOKED.
IT WAS NOT UNTIL 1936 THAT TH4E LOAN COUNCIL BEGAN DEALING
WITH THE BORROWINGS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. YET
IN ALL THAT TIME, AND ESPECIALLY SINCE THE WAR, THE
SCALE OF OPERATIONS OF LOCAL AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAS BEEN STEADILY TRANSFORMED. WE HAVE ONLY
TO LOOK AT THlE FIGURES OF COMPAFr'ATIVE DEBTS. THE INDEBTEDNESS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH HAS NOT GROWN SINCE THE WAR BUT THE DEBTS
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMEN4T AUTHORITIES HAVE
MULTIPLIED MORE THAN TWELVE TIMES. LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES ARE NOW BORROWING MORE EACH YEAR THAN THE TOTAL
AMOUNT OF THEIR OUTSTANDING DEBT ONLY 20 YEARS OR SO AGO.
AT THE SAME TIME THERE HAVE BEEN ACCELERATING DEIMANDS QUITE
NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE DEMANDS ON THE SaCRVICES WHICH LOCAL
GOVERNMENT PROVIDES. YET NOTHING W". AS DONE TO REDRESS THESE
DEFICIENCIES; NOTHING WAS DON! E TO CORRECT A SYSTEM" THAT
ALLOWED THEM TO WORSEN YEAR BY YEAR. 
9A
IN THIS CONTEXT I CAN HARDLY DO BETTER THAN REFER
YOU TO SOME OF THE FINDINGS OF THE RECENT REPORT OF THE
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO LOCAL GOVERNMENT .'. REAS AND
ADMINISTRATION IN IIEW SOUTH vALES, KNOWN AS THE OARNETT REPORT.
THE COMMITTEE POINTED OUT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT'S SHARE OF
TOTAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES HAS BEEN SHRI,' KING STEADILY
IN AUSTRALIA. IN 1969-70 IT REPRESENTED 7.11' 7 OF TOTAL
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE IN AUSTRALIA, COMPARED WITH 21.670
IN CANADA, 25,14% IN THE UNITED STATES AND 34.6% IN GREAT
BRITAIN ( WHERE, IT MUST BE SAID, THERE ARE NO STATE GOVERNMENTS),
THE COMMITTEE REPORT'ED THAT IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS
IN [ JEW SOUTH ' IALES, " THEIR AREAS COULD rNOT SURVIVE WITHOUT
A CONTINUANCE OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND,
WITHOUT EXCEPTION, COUNCILS BELIEVED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
INVOLVEMENT IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS ESSENTIAL."
THE COMMITTEE, AS YOU KNOW, RECOMMENDED SOME AMALGAMATION
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES, THIS IS AN ISSUE THAT
NEED NOT CONCERN US HERE, THOUGH I SHOULD SAY THAT THE
COMMITTEE'S BELIEFS HAPPEN TO ACCORD WITH MY OWN, IT IS
SUFFICIENT TO RECALL THAT BOTH THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ASSOCIATION AND THE SHIRES ASSOCIATION, TOGETHER REPRESENTING
ALMOST ALL LOCAL COUNCI-LS IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AGREED THAT
THERE WAS A NEED FOR A REVIEW OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM,
IN THE WORDS OF THE REPORT, " THEY POINTED OUT THAT NO
INSTITUTIONS COULD STAND STILL, LEAST OF ALL GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTIONS, YET MAJOR REFORMS IN LOCAL GOVERNMEINT HAD
BEEN FEW AND FAR BETWEEN." it e I! 
i0
THE FACT IS THAT FOR. AT LEAST TWO DECADES
SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS STOOD BY WHILE SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES
DEVELOPED IN MANY OF THE PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
WHICH IT WAS THE DUTY OF THE STATE-LOCAL GOVERNMENT
SECTOR TO PROVIDE. PARTLY THIS WAS DUE TO INSUFFICIENT
RESOURCES.; BUT IT WAS ALSO A REFLECTION OF PROCESSES
OF PLANNING AND DETERMINING PRIORITIES WHICH WERE
INADEQUATE OR NARROWLY BASED. HiY GOVERNMENT HAS SET
ITSELF THE TASK OF HELPING TO REMEDY THESE DEFICIENCIES
IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES.
.4E HAVE MADE A STRONG BEGINNING WITAESS THE NEW OR
ENLARGED ALLOCATIONS IN OUR BUDGET FOR 1973-74 FOR
EDUCATION, COMMUNITY HEALTH, PUBLIC HOUSIIG, SEWERAGE
SElVICES, LAND MANAGEMENT, URBAN TRANSPORT AND GROWTH
CENTRES. TOTAL ALLOCATIONS TO THE STATES IN 1973-74,
INCLUDING THE STATE GOVERNMENTS' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS,
BUT EXCLUDING UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF GRANTS, ARE ESTIMATED
TO BE NO LESS THAN 2Lt PER CENT GREATER THAN T: iE
CORRESPONDING ALLOCATIONS IN 1972-73. 
1~ 1-
IT IS NOT, HOWEVER, SIMPLY A MATTER OF PROVIDING
MORE MONEY. AT THE RISK OF VOICING A TRUISM, LET ME SAY
THAT THE IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL SOVENIMENT DERIVES FROM
THE VERY FACT THAT IT IS LOCAL THAT THE SERVICES
AND FACILITIES IT PROVIDES HAVE SUCH A CLOSE AND DIRECT
IMPACT ON THE WELFARE OF THE POPULATION IT SERVES.
IT IS OUR AIM, IN PART, TO MAKE AVAILABLE TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT FUNDS MORE ADEQUAFE FOP ITS FUNCTIONS.
BUT OUR AIM IS LARGER THAN THAT. IF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT IS TO PLAY THE FULLER AND MORE EFFECTIVE
PART THAT I BELIEVE THE COMMUNITY WISHES IT TO PLAY,
THEN WE MUST ALSO INCREASE THE EFFECTIVE INFLUENCE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXERCISES Ii RELATION ro THE
FUNDAMENTAL DECISION-MAKING AFFECTING ITS ACTIVITIES.
IT WILL REPRESENT A MOST SIGNIFICANT STEP TOWARDS
REAL FEDERALISM,, REAL LOCAL PARTICIPATION IN, PUBLIC
AFFAIRS AND, INDEED, REAL DECENTRALISATION OF
GOVERNMENT WHEN THIS IS ACHIEVED. / i11 
12
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN-SEVERAL IMPORTANT
INITIATIVES IN THAT DIRECTION. IN ITS AUTUMN SITTINGS
LAST YEAR WITHIN SIX M9NTAIS OF THE ELECTION THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT PASSED A NEW~ GRANITS COMMISSION
ACT AUTHORISING THAT BODY TO INOUiRE INJTO APPLICAVIOIS
FOR ASSISTANCE BY REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. ANY ASS ISTANCE RECOMMENDED BY THE COtIMI SSION
AND APPROVED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE PAID
TO THE STATES UNDER SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON
CONDITION THAT IT BE PASSED ON T0 THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED. ADDITIONAL MENSERS HAVE SEENJ
APPOINTED TO THE COMIMISSIO! AND ITS STAFF IS BEING
EXPANDED TO ENABLE IT TO DEAL WITH THIS LARGE NEW
RESPONSIBILITY. IT IS HOPED THAT APPLICATIONS SY
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS WILL BEGIN TO BE RECEIVED AND
CONSIDERED EARLY THIS YEAR. FROM NOW ON, THE COMMISSION
WILL PLAY THE SAME ROLE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
REGIONS AS IT HAS BETWEEN THE STATES SINCE 193). I SHOULD
STRESS THAT THIS REFORM PAYS DUE HEED TO THE NATURAL
RIGHTS AND INTERESTS OF THE STATES. A'NY REGIONAL AUTHORITY
THAT APPLIES FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE WILL BE REQUIRED TO
NOTIFY THE APPROPRIATE STATE JINISTER, AND THE COMMISSION
ITSELF WILL BE REQUIRED TO CONSIDER ANY SUBMISSIONS FROM
STATE flINISTERS ON THE APPLICATION. 1013 
13
OUR SECOND GREAT IITIATIVE LAST YEAR WAS
TO SEEK A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE
LOA1N COUNCIL. OUR PURPOSE WAS, AND STILL IS., TO ADMIT
REPRESENTATIVES OF ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS FROM EACH
STATE AND ENABLE THE COMMONWEALTH, ON REQUEST, TO
RAISE APPROVED LOANS OHi BE!. IALF OF SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. THEY WOULD TIUS
HAVE THE ADVANTAGE OF THE LONGER PERIOD AND LOWER
INTEREST RATES THAT APPLY TO LOANS RAISED BY THE
COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATES. THIS WAS A
FIRM UNDERTAKING IN MY POLICY SPEECH AT THE LAST
ELECTIONS. I FIRST RAISED THE PROPOSALS WITH THE
PREMIERS AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION IN SEPTEMSER
LAST YEAR AND I REMIND YOU THAT IT WAS AT THE EXPRESS
INSISTENCE OF MY GOVERNMENT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT
REPRESENTATIVES WERE ADMITTED TO THE CONVENTION'S
DELIBERATIONS. MADE IT CLEAR FROM THE START THAT
WITHOUT YOUR PARTICIPATION WE WOULD HAVE NO PART IN
THE CONVENTION AT ALL. I DOUBT IF ANYONE, IN
RETROSPECT, WOULD CLAIM MUCH SUCCESS FOR THAT
CONVENTION, BUT IT IS WORTH RECALLING SOME WORDS THAT
I USED TO THE PREMIERS WHEN EXPLAINING THE PURPOSE OF
OUR PROPOSALS. , I14 
I1!
I TOLD THE CONVENTION: " I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT
THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MANY MINDS HERE RELATES
TO THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS BETWEE; I THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. SOtlE OF YOU MAY PREFER
TO BELIEVE THAT THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MY
MIND IS TO CONTINUE AND. EVE;-COMPOUND THE PRESENT
SITUATION BY WHICH THE 1. ATIONALI GOVERNMENT DOMI! JATES
THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS BET'iEEN IT AND THE STATES,
THAT IS NOT TRUE. IIY OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION
AND CONCERN IN THIS CONTEXT IS TO BALANCE THE
FUNCTIONS AND FINACES OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE ADEQUATE
SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENTS OF RESOURCES. I WISH
EACH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT TO BE IN A POSITION TO
PERFORM BETTER ITS ASSIGNED FUNCTIONS, FOR THE
BETTER WELFARE OF ALL OUR CITIZENS, WHEREVER THEY
LIVE." 
15
IN OCTOBER LAST YEAR A SPECIAL PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE WAS HELD TO DISCUSS THESE QUESTIONS. AT
THAT CONFERENCE IN CANBERRA I AGAIN PROPOSED THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAVE BOTH A VOICE AND A VOTE ON THE
LOAN COUNCIL AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BE
EMPOWERED TO BORROW MONEY ON LOCAL GOVElNMENTS'
BEHALF. SPECIFICALLY I SUGGE.' TED THAT REPRESEFNTATIVES
OF ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE ADMITTED TO ALL LOA; J
COUNCIL DISCUSSIONS, WITH A RIGHT TO VOTE ON THOSE
MATTERS DIRECTLY AFFECTING THEIR INTERESTS ESSENTIALLY,
THE BORROWING PROGRAMS FOR THE BODIES THEY REPRESENT
AND THE ALLOCATIONS OF THESE PROGRAMS. I NLED HARDLY
REMIND YOU OF THE RESULTS OF THAT MEETING. JUR
PROPOSALS WERE TURNED DOWN. TIlE IMPORTANT POINT
TO REMEMBER IS THAT THE PROPOSED CHAiJGES COULD
HAVE BEEN EFFECTED QUITE SIMPLY AT THAT MEETING BY
AN AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE BETWEEN THE PREMIERS AND
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERN;. IENT TO AMEND THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT,
IF THAT HAD BEEN DONE, NO CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT WOULD
HAVE BEEN REQUIRED. BUT WHEN THE PREMIERS REJECTED OUR
PROPOSALS WE HAD NO ALTERNATIVE BOUND AS WE WERE BY OUR
MANDATE FROM THE PEOPLE BUT TO PROCEED WITH A REFERENDUM.
THAT REFERENDUM, IF CARRIED, WILL EMPOWER THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT TO BORROW ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
GRANT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECTLY. ,/ 16 
if)
IT MUST SURELY STRIKE YOU AS ODD THAT, ' HILE
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ARRANGEMENTS FOR BORROWINGS DY STATE
GOVERNMENTS TO BE UNDERTAKEN ON THEIR BEHALF BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE
LARGELY LEFT TO FEND FOR THEMSELVES IN THE CAPITAL MARKETS.
' ITH THE GROWING COMPLEXITY AND SOPHISTICATION OF THESrE
MARKETS THEY ARE HANDICAPPED AS BORROWERS. THEY MUST
COMPETE ON THE MONEY MARKET AMONG THEMSELVES, AGAINST
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND AGAINST OTHER FINANCIAL
ORGANISATIONS. GIVEN THE NATURE AND RANGE OF PUBLIC
SERVICES AND FACILITIES THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
ARE CALLED UPON TO PROVIDE, WHY SHOULDN'T FHE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, WITH ITS SUPERIOR CAPACITY AS A BORROWIER,
UNDERTAKE BORROWINGS ON THEIR BEHALF?
THE COSTS OF SERVICING THEIR BORROWINGS BEAR
HEAVILY AND INCREASINGLY SO ON THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. IHILE THE PICTURE DIFFERS
FROM STATE TO STATE, AND BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL AUTHORITIES,
OVERALL INTEREST PAYMENTS BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
WOULD NO'WY BE EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 12 PER CENT OF THEIR
REVENUES. INTEREST PAYMENTS PLUS CAPITAL REPAYMENTS
AMOUNTED TO $ 177.5 MILLION IN 1970-71, EQUIVALENT TO
ABOUT 25 PER CENT OF REVENUES. ./ 17 
17
You HAVE HEARD IT SAID AND NO DOUBT YOU WILL
HEAR IT AGAIN THAT IF WE WANT TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THEN ALL WE NEED . DO IS GIVE MORE MONEY TO THE ) TATES AJD
LET THE STATES DISBURSE IT OR RAISE FUNDS IN THE USUAL
WAY. THAT ARGUMENT IGNORES AN" D OBSCURES THE REAL
ISSUES IN THIS REFERENDUM, FOR ONE THING IT IS A MISTAKE,
AS I HAVE SAID, TO SUPPOSE THAT T; 1IS ARGUMENT IS ABOUT
MONEY ALONE, THOUGH MORE MONEY 13 CERTAI: LY ;! EEDED,
IT IS VERY MUCH AN ARGUMENT. ABOUT BALAIJCING AVAILABLE
RESOURCES, AND FLEXIBILITY IN THE C2EATIONI AND APPLICATIONJ
OF THOSE RESOURCES, IT IS ALSO AN ARGUMENT A30UT THE
ULTIMATE STATUS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ITSELF. Is IT TO
REMAIN A VASSAL OF THE STATES, A POOR RELATION OF THE
STATES, OR IS IT TO BE GIVEN ITS RIGHTFUL AND HONOURED
PLACE AS FAR AS POSSIBLE, AN INDEFPENDE!' T AIND DISTINCTIVE
PLACE AS AN EQUAL PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM?
FOR MY PART I HAVE NO WISH TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECOME
AN APPENDAGE OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANY MORE THAN I
WANT IT TO REMAIN AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS,
BUT I DO WANT IT TO HAVE ADEQUATE AND REASONABLE ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. . IE ARE NOT SEEKING TO DENY
ANY RIGHTS OR POWERS OR RESOURCES TO THE STATES. INDEED
I WOULD BE THE FIRST TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE STATES THEMSELVES
HAVE OFTEN BEEN DEPRIVED OF THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES THEY
NEED, A GREAT NUMBER OF OUR INITIATIVES IN OUR FIRST YEAR
OF OFFICE, A GREAT PART OF THE THRUST AND PHILOSOPHY OF OUR
FIRST BUDGET, WERE CONCERNED WITH REDRESSING DEFICIENCIES
IN THE REVENUES OF THE STATES. AND JUST AS I WANT THE STATES
TO HAVE THE MEANS TO DISCHARGE THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
ADEQUATELY, SO I PRESS THE SAME CASE ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. ., 11 
13
W; HY SHOULD LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE " 4HOLLY DEPENDENT
ON THE STA-rES? WHY SHOULD IT BE DENIED THE RIGHT TO
DEAL DIRECTLY WITH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT? THERE
ARE MANY MATTERS WHERE THERE ARE DISTINCT ADVANTAGES
IN DIRECT DEALING BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. I GIVE YOU A RECENT AND HIGHLY
TOPICAL EXAMPLE OUR FLOOD RELIEF PROGRAM. ', IE HAVE
GUARANTEED TO THE PEOPLE OF'QUEENSLAND AND iEW SOUTH
4ALES FLOOD RELIEF AND RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMS THAT
ARE VIRTUALLY OPEN-E4DED, OUR RESPONSE TO THE DISASTER
WAS, QUITE NATURALLY, IMMEDIATE AND GENEROUS, IT IS
EQUALLY NATURAL AND OBVIOUS THAT THE BEST WAY TO DISTRIBUTE
AND ALLOCATE THOSE FUNDS IS BY DIRECT CONSULTATION
BETWEEN THE AUTHORITY PROVIDING THEM AND THE REGIONAL
AUTHORITIES WHO WILL BE USING THEM. AGAIN, AS YOU KNOW,
WE HAVE AMBITIOUS PROGRAMS FOR SEWERAGE WORKS AND CHILD
CARE FACILITIES AND HEALTH CENTRES. " IE HAVE EMBARKED ON
OUR LONG-TERN PLANS FOR THE RENOVATION OF OUR SUBURBS AND
THE CREATION OF NEW CITIES. IN THE NEXT FEW MONTHS WE SHALL
BE MAKING ARRANGEMENTS WITH THE STATES TO ALLOCATE FUNDS FOR
ROADS FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEAR PERIOD. IN ALL THESE AREAS
IT IS QUITE ESSENTIAL AND I SHOULD HAVE THOUGHT, QUITE
OBVIOUS THAT SUCCESS WILL DEPEND IN LARGE MEASURE ON
OPPORTUNITIES FOR DIRECT DEAL-ING AND DIRECT FINANCIAL
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE AUSTRALIAN
UOVERNMENT. So LET US BE QUITE CLEAR THAT THOSE WHO RESIST
THIS REFERENDUM ARE NOT MER-LY FRUSTFRATING THE PROGRESS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT; THEY ARE DOING THEIR BEST TO BLOCK THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S PLANS FOR SOCIAL WELFARE AND REFORM
ON AN UNPRECEDENTED SCALE. 
19
I SAID AT THE OUTSET THAT THE SUCCESS OF THIS
REFERENDUM, WITH ALL ITS PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, WOULD DEPEND LARGELY ON YOUR
SUPPORT, YOUR KNOWLEDGEABLE AND EXPERT SUPPORT AS
ADMINISTRATORS IN THIS FIELD. I THI YOU MUST ASK
YOURSELVES WHETHER YOU ARE CONTENT WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AS IT IS, WITH ITS GROWING ACCUMULATION OF DEBT, ITS
WIDENING GAP BETWEEN RESPO4SIBILITIES AND RESOURCES,
ITS ENDLESS NEED TO FORCE UP RATES AND CHARGES, ITS
DEMEANED AND DIMINISHED STATUS IN ThE IhIERARCHY OF
GOVERNMENT, ITS FRUSTRATIONS AND DISAPPOINTMENTS.
IF YOU BELIEVE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS CRYING OUT FOR
A NEN DEAL THEN I ASK YOU TO SUPPORT THIS REFERENDUM.
YOU MUST BE THE OPINION MAKERS ON THIS ISSUE; YOUR
THOUGHTS, YOUR OPINIONS, YOUR LETTERS, YOUR INFLUENCE
ARE WHAT WILL COUNT. I MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR APPEALING
TO YOU IN THIS WAY BECAUSE I THINK THE ISSUES ARE
CRUCIAL AND THE CHOICE FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR WELFARE AND
PROGRESS. WE DO NOT SEEK CHANGE FOR CHANGE'S SAKE.
WE SEEK CHANGE BECAUSE IT IS DEMANDED OF US, FORCED
UPON US BY INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT AND COMPLEX PROBLEMS
OF SOCIAL PLANNING AND ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT. ' 4E CAN NO
LONGER CLING TO OLD CONCEPTS, TO DOCUMENTS AND RULES
AND AGREEMENTS DRAWN UP IN THE DISTANT PAST, TO IRRELEVANT
OBSESSIONS WITH BOUNDARY LINES AND THE DEMARCATION OF RIGHTS
AND INTERESTS. LET US ACKNOWLEDGE THAT OUR FIRST TASK
OUR ONLY TASK IS TO ELEVATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ITS PROPER
PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY AND GIVE IT THE MEANS TO CARRY
OUT ITS WORK FOR THE LASTING BENEFIT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. 



C I
SPE BY TI-H!-PRI[ I iNISTI., fi, E. G. liiTlfLAl NM. P.,
AT TihE OP IN IG OF TihE I IPAfP. DS . IF IELD DAYS AT BI\ AID1E B, iS,
VICFORIA, TiFSDAY, 19 I: EBRUAL! RY
NOTHING PROVES MORE CLEARLY THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF
PRIMARY INDUSTRY TO AUSTRALIA THAN AN EVENT OF THE KIND
BEING STAGED HIF. RE TODAY, To SEE THE DISPLAYS OF FARM
EQUIPMENT, THE DEMONSTRATION OF NEW TECHNIQUES AND THE
EXHIBITIONS OF STOCK IS TO CONFIRM THE VITALITY,
SOPHISTICATION AND DURABILITY OF FARMING IN AUSTRALIA,
NO GOVERNMENT CAN FAIL TO BE IMPRESSED BY THIS VITAL ASPECT
OF OUR NATIONAL LIFE. CERTAINLY THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT
RECOGNISES THAT WITHOUT THE RURAL ACTIVITIES WHICH ARE SO
VIVIDLY ON SHOW TODAY AUSTRALIA COULD NOT HOPE TO CONTINUE
AS A PROSPEROUS AND GROWING NATION.
I AM GLAD TO HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO AFFIRM THE
GOVERNMENT'S GREAT CONCERN FOR THE CONTINUED WELL-BEING
OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY, BECAUSE SO MUCH OF THE DEBATE SURROUNDING
THE LAST FEDERAL ELECTIONS INVOLVED ISSUES AFFECTING OUR CITIES,
THERE HAS BEEN A TENDENCY IN SOME QUARTERS TO BELIEVE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT ATTACHES A DIMINISHED IMPORTANCE TO OUR RURAL AREAS.
I WANT TO SAY QUITE UNEQUIVOCALLY THAT ANY SUCH BELIEF IS
UNFOUNDED. THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT IS AS DEDICATED AS ANY
PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT TO THE CREATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SELFSUFFICIENT,
PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT PRIMARY INDUSTRIES,
INDEED, I BELIEVE THATI WE HAVE GIVEN A NEW AND HEALTHY EMPHASIS
TO THCESE INDUSTRIES, 
11o 600RwNME'T HAS DOME SO MIUCH 10 REDJUCE THE DUJPDEN WHIJCH
RURAL1 INDUSTRIES HAVL HAD TO CARRY AS A RESULT OF EXCES; SIVE
TAR IFF PROTECTI1ON, No Gov0RHIMET HAS DONE SO MU~ LCH TO IN'SUPcL
THAT MOST PUBLIC ASSISTANCE GOES TO THOSE FAR~ M FAMILIES WHiO NFLD
IT MOST. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE SO MUCH TO OPEN UP NFAW AND
EXPANDING OVERSEAS MARKETS,
DESPITE WHAT WE HAVE DONE, THERE IS STILL MISUNDERSTANDING,
AND CRITICISM OF THE THRUST OF OUR RURAL POLICIES IN SOME
QUARTERS, OUR CRITICS HAVE SEIZED UPON THE ABOLITION OR
REDUCTION OF SOME SUBSIDIES IN AN ATTEMPT TO ARGUE THAT THE
GOVERNMENT IS ANTI-RURAL. THEY HA\' E NOT BOTHERED TO CONSIDER
WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES ARE APPROPRIATE FOR OUR ECONOMY OR
HELPFUL TO OUR FARMERS. THEY HAVE NOT STOPPED TO CONSIDER
WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES HELP ALL FARMERS OR WHETHER THEY
OVERWHELMINGLY FAVOUR THE LARGEST AND WEALTHIEST PRODUCERS
ANDj IN SO DOING, DEPRIVE. THE GOVERNMENT OF MONE Y WHICH
MIGHT BE BETTER DIRECTED TO AID FAMILY . li THEY HAVE NOT
STOPPED TO CONSIDER WHETHER THESE SUBSIDIES HAVE STOOD IN
THE WAY OF ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS WHICH PROMISE GREATER
LONG-TERM ASSISTANCE TO FARMERS. THEY HAVE NOT STOPPED TO
CONSIDER WHAT WERE THE MOTIVES BEHIND THEIR INTRODUCTION,
ANY ANALYSIS OF OUR PRIMARY INDUSTRY POLICY WILL SHOW THAT
WE ARE STRIVING TO SEE THAT OUR RURAL AREAS ARE NOT CYNICALLY
EXPLOITED BY PORK-BARREL POLITICS. WE WANT TO ENSURE THAT
THEY ARE GIVEN A FIRM ECONOMIC BASIS SO THAT COUNTRY PEOPLE
CAN BE SURE OF SHARING THE SECURITY AND WEALTH OF OUR NATION. 
TO ACHIEVE OUR AIIIS WE ARE STRIVING TO IMPROVE THE
DOMESTIC HARKETS FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS, TO CONSOLIDATE
EXIST] HG EXPORT M1ARKETS AND TO CREATE NEW MARKETS. AS
I HAVE ALFREADY INDICATED. I } 3ELIEVE WE HAVE HAD A GREAT
DEAL OF SUCCESS IN THESE IERMS IN THE LAST YEAR, WE HAVE,
FOR EXANPLE, NEGOTIATED WHEAT AND SUGAR CONTRACTS WITH
CHINA AND RURAL INDUSTRY WILL BENEFIT FROM THE CLOSER TRADE
TIES WE HAVE ESTABLISHED WITH JAPAN.
WHATEVER OUR CRITICS MIGHT SAY, THE FACT REMAINS
THAT THERE HAS BEEN A GREAT IMPROVEMENT IN FARM INCOME
IN THE LAST YEAR.
IN THE THREE YEARS ENDED 1969/ 70 FARM INCOME AVERAGED
ABOUT $ 1,050 MILLION A YEAR. THE ONSET OF DROUGHT AND
DECLINING PRICES CAUSED FARM INCOME TO DROP TO $ 885 MILLION
IN 1970/ 71 AND MANY PRODUCERS FACED SERIOUS FINANCIAL
DIFFICULTIES,. LAST YEAR SAW A COMPLETE REVERSAL OF THIS
SITUATION AND, UNTIL RECENTLY, THE ESTIMATE FOR FARM INCOME
IN 1973/ 74 WAS $ 2,885 MILLION MORE THAN THREE TIMES AS
GREAT AS IN 19/ 0/ 71 AND WELL OVER DOUBLE THE AVERAGE INCOME
FOR THE THREE YEARS BEFORE THEN. 
THE SAME SORT OF PATTERN EMERGED L-AST YEAR IN TrHE
FIGURES FOR EXPOR~ TS OF RURAL ORIGIN. HS EXPORTS EARNED
AUSTRLIA. $ 2,1419 M1ILLION Im 1971/ 72. THE MOST RECENT
ESTIMATE FOR 197-/ 7/ 4 PREDICTED THAT THEY WOULD BE WORTH
$ 3,874-MILLION A VERY GREAT IMPROVEMENT.
THE DEVASTATING FLOODS WHICH HAVE SW4EPT QUEENSLAND
AND NORTHERN NEW SOUTH WALES IN RECENT WEEKS WI1LL INEVITABLY
FORCE A REVISION OF THESE ESTIMATES. THEY WILL ALSO MEAN
THAT MANY FARMERS WILL NOT SHARE THE CURRENT BUOYANCY OF
PRICES FOR RURAL COMMODITIES. NEVERTHELESS, IT REMAINS TRUE
THAT THE MARKET OUTLOOK FOR AUSTRALIAN PRIMARY INDUSTRY IS
EXTREMELY FAVOURABLE AND THAT A GOVERNMENT POLICY AIMED AT
MAINTAINING AND IMPROVING THIS BUOYANCY IS SOUNDLY BASED.
I WOULD BE MUCH TOO SANGUINE IF I TRIED TO PRETEND
THAT SOME UNCERTAINTIES DID NOT FACE PRIMARY PRODUCERS.
THE FLOODS AND CYCLONES IN THE NORTH INDICATE YET AGAIN
THE UNPREDICTABILITY OF A FARMER'IS LIFE. SOME UNPREDICTABILITY
MUST ALSO RESULT FROM THE CURRENT OIL PROBLEM, ESPECIALLY AS
IT RELATES TO BUNKERING FUEL. THE GOVERNMENT IS DOING ALL
THAT IT CAN TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS CREATED BY THESE NEW
AND SUDDEN FACTORS IN THE RURAL OUTLOOK. IN THE CASE OF THE
QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH WALES FLOODS, IT IS PROVIDING ALL
POSSIBLE ASSISTANCE TO HELP OVERCOME THE DAMAGE CAUSED. IN THE
CASE OF THE INTERNATIONAL OIL CRISIS, WE ARE BACKING UP OUR OWN
NATURAL WEALTH WITH GOVERNMENT POLICIES AIMED AT PROTECTING AND
ADVANCING OUR NATIONAL INTERESTS. 
A MAJOR FACTOR IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
RURAL. POLICY HAS BEEN THE ROLE PLAYED BY TIHE MINISTER FOR
PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR KEN WIRIEDT. FARMERS COULD NOT
HOPE TO HAVE A MORE PERSUASIVE AD\ VOCATE IN THE CABINET.
HE HAS INTRODUCED A RAT* IONAL COMMITMENT TO0 THE NEEDS OF PIRIMIARY
PRODUCERS AND THIS COMMITMENT NOWI PERVADES ALL AREAS OF OUR
RURAL POLICY. A RECENT OPINION POLL AMONG PRIMARY PRODUCERS
SHOWED THAT THEY APPRECIATED SENATOR WRIEDT' S WORK; MORE
THAN 70 PER CENT OF THEM APPROVED HIS HANDLING OF HIS
PORTFOLIO. ONE OF THE MAJOR ACTIVITIES THAT HE HA* S SET IN MOTION
IS THE HOLDING OF AN INQUIRY INTO ALL ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY
IN AUSTRALIA. THE INQUIRY WILL RESULT IN THE FIRST
GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED REPORT ON OVERALL RURAL POLICY SINCE
THE PUBLICATION OF " AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION: AIMS AND POLICIES"
BY -THE FORMER DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND AGRICULTURE IN 1952,
MORE THAN 20 YEARS AGO. To CONDUCT THE INQUIRY THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET UP A RURAL POLICY WORKING GROUP, HEADED By DR. STUART
HARRIS, DEPUTY SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT O F OVERSEAS TRADE.
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS ALSO TAKEN STEPS TO ENSURE THAT THE WORKING
GROUP HAS READY AND FULL ACCESS TO THE VIEWS OF FARMERS.
HE HAS AGREED TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMITTEE OF FARMERS
TO ADVISE AND CO-OPERATE WITH THE GROUP. 
-6-
A HiAJOR BASIS FOR THE INQUIRY IS THE GOVERNMNENT' S
\' IEll THAT THERE IS NO0 PLACE IN THE ECONOMY FOR A RURAL
POLICY THAT IS NOT BOTH EQUITABLE FOR PRIM~ ARY( PRODUCERS
AND ECONOMICALLY SOUND. 1IN ANNOU1NCING THE INQUIRY, THE
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR KEN 14RIEDT, AND
I SAID THE GOVERNMENT WISHES TO AVOID AD HOC DECISIONS
THAT MIGHT APPEAR TO SOME TO BE POLITICALLY ATTRACTIVE
AT THE TIME, BUT WHICH IN FACT MIGHT OFFER NO LONG TERM
SECURITY OR REAL BENEFITS TO THE GENUINE PRIMARY PRODUCER.
THE GOVERNMENT NEEDED A BASIS OF EXPERT ADVICE ON WHICH
TO FORMULATE ECONOMICALLY SOUND AND SOCIALLY EQUITABLE
MEASURES THAT WOULD HELP THE RESIDENT FARM FAMILY.
IT ALSO SAW A NEED FOR A RURAL POLICY THAT RECOGNISED
THAT LARGE AND IMPORTANT SECTIONS OF THE RURAL COMMUNITY
ARE NOT THEMSELVES ENGAGED IN FARMING ALTHOUGH THE
PROSPERITY OF MANY DID DEPEND ON THE HEALTH OF THE PRIMARY
INDUSTRIES. 
-7-
THE WORKING GROUP WILL DRAFT, FOR CONSIDERATION BY
THE Govii-Mrl NFr, A " GREEN PAPER" ON RURAL POLICY, INCORPORATING
ASPECTS FROM PRESENT AUSTRALIANI GOVERNMENT POLICIES SUCH AS
SELECTIVE DECENTRALISATION, CONSERVATION, RURAL. RECONSTRUCTION
AND LONG-TERM INTERNATI ONAL COMMODITY AGREEMENTS. IT WILL
ALSO ATTEMPT TO INTEGRATE THESE AND OTHER FACTORS INTO A SET
OF PRINCIPLES UPON WHICH FUTURE POLICIES COULD BE BUILT.
WE EXPECT TO PUBLISH THE GREEN PAPER BY GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY
BUT WITHOUT FORMAL ENDORSEMENT, IN THAT FORM, IT WOULD BE
DEBATED IN CABINET, IN PARLIAMENT, AND IN THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY PARTICULARLY IN THE RURAL SECTOR. THESE DEBATES
WILL ASSIST THE GOVERNMENT T' 0 CREATE A MORE VIABLE RURAL
SECTOR IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, WE HOPE TO RECEIVE THE
WORKING GROUP'S REPORT BY APRIL,
IN ADDITION TO THE EVOLUTION OF NEW POLICIES TO ENSURE
THE. PROSPERITY OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS MOVED
TO CREATE OTHER OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUR RURAL AREAS. THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT IS THE FIRST TO TAKE POSITIVE AND DECISIVE ACTION
TO PROMOTE DECENTRALISATION IN AUSTRALIA. PLANNING FOR THE
CREATION OF A NEW GROWTH CENTRE AT ALBURY-WODONGA IS ALREADY
WELL ADVANCED AND WE AIM TO MAKE THIS THE PROTOTYPE FOR OTHER
GROWTH CENTRES, DECENTRALISATION HAS LONG BEEN TALKED ABOUT
IN THIS COUNTRY. THE LAST YEAR HAS SEEN THE BEGINNING OF THE
FIRST REALLY CONCRETE PROPOSALS TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT. 
-8-
I BELIEVE THAT BY THE APPLICATION OF SENSIBLE
POLICIES ON PRIMARY INDUSTRY AND DECENTRAL.. ISATION WE CAN
ENSURE THAT PEOPLE IN OUR RURAL AREAS SHARE THE BENEFITS
OF THE UNDOUBTEDLY GREAT ! EALTH OF AUSTRALIA, PEOPLE IN
THESE AREAS HAVE CONTRIBUTED AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT TO THAT
WEALTH IN THE PAST AND I AM SURE THAT THEIR CONTRIBUTION
WILL REMAIN FUNDAMENTALLY IMPORTANT IN THE FUTURE. 



-7
GOVERNMENT ACHIEVEMENTS IN TASMANIA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO A LUNCHEON OF THE HOBART CHAMBER OF COMMERCE,
HOBART, 22 FEBRUARY 1974
THIS IS MY FOURTH VISIT TO TASMANIA SINCE I
BECAME PRIME MINISTER. I CONFESS THAT IT IS ALTOGETHER
TOO RARE A PLEASURE FOR ME TO VISIT YOUR CHARMING AND
HISTORIC CITY. AFTER THIS WEEK, I DECIDED I WOULD RATHER
BE HERE WITH YOU THAN TALKING TO THE GIPPSLAND FARMERS.
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE A FRIENDLY GATHERING OF TASMANIAN
BUSINESSMEN TO MAKE ONE FEEL AT HOME: NO TOMATOES,
NO EGGS, NO PITCHFORKS, THEN I WAS REMINDED THAT MUCH
OF AUSTRALIA'S'SUPERPHOSPHATE IS MANUFACTURED HERE IN
TASMANIA, SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND WHY AUSTRALIAN PRIME
MINISTERS OCCASIONALLY WANT TO GO ABROAD. / 2 
Now SINCE I'VE RAISED THIS MATTER OF THE PHOSPHATE
BOUNTY, AND SINCE IT IS CLEARLY A MATTER OF VERY GREAT
INTEREST TO AN AGRICULTURAL STATE SUCH AS YOURS, LET ME
BEGIN BY SAYING A FEW WORDS ABOUT THE DECISION WE MADE, THE
OTHER DAY IN VICTORIA I QUOTED SOME REMARKS BY SIR JOHN
MCEWEN WHEN THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT ABOLISHED
THE LAST PHOSPHATE BOUNTY IN 1950, I WANT TO REMIND YOU
OF WHAT THE FORMER LEADER OF THE COUNTRY PARTY SAID BECAUSE
I KNOW HE IS A MAN YOU RESPECT AND I REGRET THAT HIS WORDS
DID NOT RECEIVE THE PUBLICITY WHICH I HOPED THEY WOULD,
DON'T FORGET THAT IT WAS A LABOR GOVERNMENT THAT INTRODUCED
THE FIRST PHOSPHATE BOUNTY AS A WARTIME MEASURE AND IT WAS
THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT THAT REPEALED IT, THEIR
DECISION WAS EXPLAINED BY SIR JOHN MCEWEN IN THESE TERMS:
THE ACT TO BE REPEALED WAS PASSED AS A
WARTIME CONTINGENCY ArID IT HAS SERVED ITS
PURPOSE, IT HAS ONLY A LIMITED USEFULNESS,
THERE IS NO LONGER ANY JUSTIFICATION FOR
PAYMENT FROM PUBLIC FUNDS OF A BOUNTY TO
REDUCE THE COST OF A PRODUCT WHEN FOR THE
OVERWHELMING PERCENTAGE OF ITS USERS IT
HAS SERVED ITS PURPOSE, 
-3-
Now THAT IS PRECISELY OUR POSITION TODAY, THE
BOUNTY HAS OUTLIVED ITS USEFULNESS, IT HAS SERVED ITS PURPOSE,
IN THE PRESENT BOUYANT CONDITION OF THE RURAL SECTOR, NO
GOVERNMENT CAN JUSTIFY THE EXPENDITURE OF $ 60 MILLION A YEAR
ON A SUBSIDY THAT IS NO LONGER USEFUL, WE HAVE GIVEN A FULL
YEAR'S NOTICE OF THE REMOVAL OF THE SUBSIDY AND I HAVE
REMINDED FARMERS THAT IF THEY FEEL THEY HAVE A CASE FOR
SPECIAL ASSISTANCE THEY SHOULD PUT IT TO THE INDUSTRIES
ASSISTANCE COMMISSION WHICH MY GOVERNMENT SET UP, I MUST
SAY I FIND IT CURIOUS. THAT THE PEOPLE OBJECTING MOST LOUDLY
TO THE REMOVAL OF THIS SUBSIDY ARE THOSE WHO ARE CONSTANTLY
TELLING US TO REDUCE GOVERNMENT SPENDING,
LET ME EXPRESS THAT FIGURE OF $ 60 MILLION A YEAR
IN TERMS RELEVANT TO YOUR OWN STATE, IT IS ROUGHLY EQUAL TO
THE ESTIMATED TOTAL $ 65,159,000 OF ALL SPECIFIC PURPOSE
REVENUE PAYMENTS TO BE MADE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
TASMANIA IN THE PRESENT FINANCIAL YEAR, IT IS ALMOST
TWO-THIRDS THE TOTAL OF ALL GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE TO
TASMANIA. IT IS ROUGHLY FIVE TIMES THE AMOUNT PAID BY THE
COMMONWEALTH TO TASMANIA FOR ALL EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES IN THE
CURRENT YEAR, NOW MUCH AS I WOULD LIKE TO TELL YOU THAT THE
WHOLE $ 60 MILLION SAVED IN THIS WAY WILL BE PAID TO TASMANIA,
I REGRET I CANNOT DO SO. IT IS QUITE CLEAR, HOWEVER, THAT
SAVINGS OF THAT ORDER, WHEN APPLIED IN OTHER WAYS, CAN HAVE
A CONSIDERABLE IMPACT ON THE WELL-BEING OF THE SMALLER STATES,
MODEST SAVINGS ON A NATIONAL SCALE CAN BRING MORE THAN MODEST
REWARDS TO A STATE SUCH AS YOURS, ,/ 4 
I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO YOU BECAUSE
I KNOW THERE IS TENDENCY FOR TASMANIANS TO FEEL WHATEVER
GOVERNMENT MAY BE IN POWER THAT THEY ARE NEGLECTED OR
FORGOTTEN IN CANBERRA. YOUR PRIDE, YOUR UNIQUENESSi YOUR
HISTORY, YOUR ISOLATION IN A LITERAL SENSE, YOUR INSULARITY
MAKE YOU SOMEWHAT SUSPICIOUS OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS. IF YOU
EXAMINE THE RECORD FAIRLY I DOUBT IF YOU WILL FIND ANY INSTANCE
OF TASMANIA BEING UNFAIRLY TREATED BY MY GOVERNMENT OR PLACED
AT A DISADVANTAGE COMPARED WITH THE OTHER STATES. INDEED IT
CAN BE SHOWN THAT TASMANIA HAS BENEFITED PROPORTIONATELY BETTER
FROM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT SPENDING THAN THE REST OF AUSTRALIA.
I SHALL LIST SOME OF THESE AREAS IN A MOMENT. BUT FIRST
LET ME MAKE A PURELY POLITICAL POINT. AS YOU KNOW, THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, WHICH COMPOSES THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT,
CURRENTLY HOLDS ALL FIVE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SEATS IN TASMANIA. THAT IS A REMARKABLE, GRATIFYING AND,
I BELIEVE, QUITE UNPRECEDENTED EXPRESSION OF PUBLIC TRUST
IN A POLITICAL PARTY. NOW THOSE FIVE SEATS IN TASMANIA
REPRESENT, FOR THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, MORE THAN HALF ITS
ENTIRE MAJORITY. I MERELY SAY THIS: IT MAY BE THAT YOUR
BEST ASSURANCE, YOUR MOST COMPELLING GUARANTEE OF MY GOVERNMENT'S
CONCERN FOR YOUR STATE LIES IN THOSE FIVE SEATS. I ASK YOU TO
ACCEPT, AS POLITICALLY REALISTIC MEN, THAT NO GOVERNMENT
ENJOYING THE PUBLIC TRUST PLACED IN IT BY THE PEOPLE OF TASMANIA
COULD AFFORD FOR A MOMENT TO NEGLECT YOUR INTERESTS OR YOUR
WELFARE. 
THE OTHER BASIC ASSURANCE YOU HAVE OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN LIES,, PARADOXICALLY IT MAY SEEM, IN OUR
CONCERN FOR THE LARGER CITIES OF THE MAINLAND. No
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS COMMITTED TO RESTRICT THE GROWTH OF
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE CAN BE INDIFFERENT TO THE GROWTH OF THE
SMALLER CAPITALS. FOR THE SAME REASON THAT WE ARE ENCOURAGING
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW CIT IES LIKE ALBURY-WODONGA WE ARE
ENCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF EXISTING CITIES SUCH As HOBART.
MIND YOU, WE ARE DETERMINED THAT HOBART WILL AVOID THE
INTOLERABLE PRESSURES PLACED ON THE' LARGER CITIES. IT
IS, HOWEVER, ESSENTIAL TO OUR PLANS FOR BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
AND MORE EQUITABLE AND EFFICIENT USE OF OUR RESOURCES THAT
SOME OF THE GROWTH OF SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE SHOULD BE DIVERTED
TO SMALLER CITIES WHERE IT WILL NOT ONLY BE ACCEPTABLE,
BUT BENEFICIAL. SYDNEY's LOSS, I TRUST, WILL BE HOBART's
GAIN. WITH THAT IN MIND, LET ME GIVE YOU SOME EXAMPLES OF HOW
TASMANIA BENEFITS FROM THE WIDE RANGE OF NEW AND INCREASED
EXPENDITURES PROVIDED IN THE GOVERNMENT's FIRST BUDGET.
TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973-74,
FOR ALL PURPOSES AND INCLUDING THE STATES' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAM,
ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL $ 228 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF $ 32 MILLION
OR 16% OVER THE AMOUNT IN 1972-73, THIS REPRESENTS OVER $ 570
PER HEAD OF POPULATION IN TASMANIA, COMPARED WITH AVERAGE PAYMENTS
TO ALL STATES OF $ 337 PER HEAD. 
6
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT TASMANIA WILL RECEIVE GENERAL
REVENUE GRANTS TOTALLING $ 97.7 MILLION IN 1973-74,
REPRESENTING $ 245 PER HEAD COMPARED WITH A NATIONAL AVERAGE
OF $ 143 PER HEAD,
TASMANIA HAS BEEN ALLOCATED $ 64 MILLION IN
GENERAL PURPOSE CAPITAL FUNDS, UNDER DECISIONS TAKEN BY THE
LOAN COUNCIL LAST JUNE, FOR STATE GOVERNMENT WORKS IN
1973-74, INCLUDING AN. INTEREST-FREE GRANT FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF $ 20,5 MILLION. IN PER CAPITA TERMS, TASMANIA
IS RECEIVING OVER DOUBLE THE NATIONAL ALLOCATION $ 161 PER
HEAD COMPARED WITH $ 66.9 PER HEAD FOR THE SIX STATES COMBINED.
ALL THESE ALLOCATIONS RECOGNISE THE SPECIAL NEEDS
OF YOUR STATE, ATTRIBUTABLE TO ITS SMALL POPULATION AND
ITS RELATIVELY LOW CAPACITY TO RAISE REVENUE AND SPREAD
ITS OVERHEAD COSTS. / 7 
7
IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT GRANTS WILL RISE DRAVATICALLY, MAINLY AS A RESULT
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE. GRANTS
FOR SCHOOLS IN TASMANIA ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL MILLION
IN 1973-74, AN INCREASE OF $ 2.9 MILLION OR 112% OVER THE
PREVIOUS YEAR. GRANTS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION WILL TOTAL
ABOUT $ 12.5 MILLION THIS YEAR, AN INCREASE OF MILLION
OR 112% OVER THE CORRESPONDING TOTAL IN 1972-73. OUR
ADVANCES FOR HOUSING WILL INCREASE BY 82'% OVER THE PREVIOUS
YEAR. WE HAVE ALSO MADE GENEROUS GRANTS TO TASMANIA FOR
GROWTH CENTRES AND OTHER URBAN AND REGIONAL PROJECTS,
FOR LAND ACQUISITION, URBAN TRANSPORT AND SEWERAGE, IN
ADDITION, TASMANIA WILL RECEIVE GRANTS OF $ 14 MILLION IN.
1973-74 UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS ARRANGEMENTS,
THIS IS ANOTHER AREA WHERE TASMANIA DOES PROPORTIONATELY
BETTER THAN OTHER STATES. IN 1973-74 ITS GRANTS WILL BE
ABOUT $ 35 PER HEAD OF POPULATION COMPARED WITH $ 214 PER HEAD
FOR THE SIX STATES. TASMANIA'S SPECIAL PROBLEMS, SUCH AS THE
HIGH COST OF ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE DUE TO YOUR
PECULIAR TOPOGRAPHICAL CONDITIONS, ARE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT
WHEN GRANTS ARE DETERMI-NED. 
-8-
IF WE LOOK AT TASMANIA'S ECONOMY AS A WHOLE
AND AS BUSINESSMEN I KNOW THAT IS YOUR MAJOR CONCERN
WE FIND A STRONG PATTERN OF EXPANSION IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS.
RETAIL SALES IN THE SEPTEMBER QUARTER WERE 12.7% HIGHER THAN
THE SAME QUARTER OF 1972, REGISTRATIONS OF NEW MOTOR VEHICLES
IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER WERE-]. 2. L'% HIGHER THAN A YEAR BEFORE,
COMPARED WITH A 10.3% INCREASE FOR THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA,
THERE WAS A STRONG GROWTH IN HOME BUILDING. THE NUMBER OF DWELLINIGS
UNDER CONSTRUCTION WAS 40,7% GREATER IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER
OF 1973 THAN IN THE DECEMBER QUARTER OF 1972 WELL ABOVE THE
AUSTRALIAN AVERAGE OF 33%. IT IS TRUE THAT THE LABOUR
MARKET HAS RECCRDED ONLY MARGINAL IMPROVEMENT IN THE PAST
YEAR, BUT THERE HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT ACCELERATION IN
EMPLOYMENT GROWTH. BETWEEN NOVEMEER 1972 AND IIOVEMBER 1073
( THE LATEST MONTH FOR WHICH FIGURES ARE AVAILABLE) THE NUMBER
OF EMPLOYED WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS INCREASED BY A MARKED
IMPROVEMENT ON THE INCREASE BETWEEN NOVEMBER 1971 AND
NOVEMBER 1972. THE EXPANSION IN FEMALE EMPLOYMENT HAS
BEEN ESPECIALLY PRONOUNCED: 6.9% IN THE LATEST 12-MONTH
PERIOD, COMPARED WITH A GROWTH OF 0.7% IN THE PRECEDING YEAP. I 1,/ 9 
C
I WOULD NOT WANT THOSE FIGURES IMPORTANT AS THEY
ARE, ENCOURAGING AS THEY ARE TO BE TAKEN IN ISOLATION TO
GIVE A MISLEADING PICTURE OF CONDITIONS IN TASMANIA, I
ACKNOWLEDGE FRANKLY THAT GrOWTH AND DEMAND IN YOUR STATE
HAS BEEN LESS MARKED THAN It! AUSTRALIA AS A WHOLE DURING
RECENT MONTHS. IN PARTICULAR YOUR LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT
JUST OVER 3% AT THE END OF JANUARY IS STILL UNACCEPTA[ LLY
HIGH, ALMOST 1% HIGHER THAN'THE NATIONAL FIGURE. I BELIEVE
THIS IS DUE TO UNIQUE LOCAL AND SEASONAL FACTORS IN TASMANIA.
NEVERTHELESS OE WANT T0 SEE THAT FIGURE REDUCED, ANID IT WILL
BE REDUCED. MY GOVERNMENT' S FIRST PRIORITY ITS FIRST DUTY
TO ITS SUPPORTERS AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WAS TO
RESTORE FULL EMPLOYMENT AFTER THE RECESSION OF 1971-72,
WE HAVE RESTORED FULL EMPLOYMIENT IN NATIONAL TERMS AND WE
HAVE RESTORED A STRONG LEVEL OF REAL NATIONAL GROWTH.
WE HAVE OPENED UP IMPORTANT NEW MARKETS IN ASIA AND OTHER
COUNTRIES FOR OUR EXPORTS, ESPECIALLY PRIMARY PRODUCTION.
FARMiERS IN PARTICULAR ARE ENJOYING RECORD INCOMES, RECORD
PRODUCTION, RECORD PROSPERITY. ViE HAVE GOT OUR OVERSEAS
RESERVES INTO A MUCH HEALTHIER STATE OF BALANCE. VIE HAVE
TAKEN OVERDUE MEASURES, * INCLUDING TWO REVALUATIONS, TO PLACE
THE CURRENCY ON A SOUNDER FOOTING IN RELATION TO CURRENCIES
OVERSEAS. I BELIEVE WE CAN NOW CLAIM THAT THE AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
IS THE STRONGEST CURRENCY IN THE WORLD. 
10
I HAVE SAID MANY TIMES THAT INFLATION REMAINS THE
MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE PROBLEM FACING THE GOVERNMENT. THE
MEASURES WE HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN INFLATION OUR TARIFF
CUTS, OUR REVALUATIONS, THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL,
OUR MONETARY POLICIES HAVE ALL HAD POSITIVE AND IMPORTANT
EFFECTS ON THE LEVEL OF INFLATION. INFLATION WOULD BE
A GREAT DEAL HIGHER TODAY IF MY GOVERNMENT HAD NOT TAKEN THE
ACTION IT HAS IF WE HAD NEGLECTED THE OVERDUE MEASURES
WHICH WERE SHIRKED FOR SO LONG EY OUR PREDECESSORS,
I GIVE AN ASSURANCE THAT OUR UNREMITTING AND M'ANY-SIDED 13ATTLE
AGAINST INFLATION WILL GO ON. THE ENERGY CRISIS AND THE
ENORMOUS UNCERTAINTIES IT HAS BROUGHT TO THE ECONOMIES OF
OUR TRADING PARTNERS MAKE THE FUTURE MORE HAZARDOUS AND
UNPREDICTABLE. ISHOULD MAKE IT QUITE PLAIN, HOWEVER, THAT
INFLATION WILL NOT BE TACKLED WITH THE OLD-FASHIONED METHODS
OF THE PAST. WE WILL NOT REDUCE INFLATION BY CREATING
UNEMPLOYMENT FOR WORKERS OR STAGNATION FOR BUSINESSMEN.
WE WILL NOT FIGHT INFLATION BY RENEGING ON THE PROMISES WE!
MADE TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FOR SOCIAL REFORM, FOR EDUCATION,
FOR DECENT CITIES, FOR BETTER TRANSPORT, FOR A NEW DEAL FOR
PENSIONERS, MIGRANTS, ABORIGINALS AND THE POOR. WE ARE OFTEN
TOLD THAT WE MUST REDUCE GOVERNMENT SPENDING. NO ONE EVER TELLS
US WHAT SPENDING WE SHOULD CUT, THE FACT IS THAT EVERY MEASURE
FOR INCREASED WELFARE OR INCREASED SPENDING ON SOCIAL REFORM.
PROGRAMS HAS BEEN SUPPORTED BY OUR OPPONENTS IN. THE PARLIAMENT,
IN THE CASE OF EDUCATION THEY EVEN ASKED US TO SPEND A LITTLE
MORE ON SCHOOLS THAT DIDN'IT' NEED IT. IN THE CASE OF PHOSPHATES,
THEY ASKED US TO KEEP A SUBSIDY THAT NO LONGER SERVES ITS PURPOSE
AND WHICH OUR PREDECESSORS THEMSELVES ABOLISHED WHEN ITS
USEFULNESS EXPIRED. IT IS ALL VERY WELL TO TALK ABOUT CUTS IN
SPENDING, BUT I ASK: WHERE ARE THE CUTS COMING FROM? 
1]
I COME NOW TO SOME MATTERS OF SPECIAL CONCERN TO YOUR
STATE. I KNOW THERE IS ANXIETY FOR THE OUTLOOK IN THE APPLE
INDUSTRY. MY COLLEAGUE, SENATOR KEN WRIEDT, THE MINISTER
FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, IS AWARE OF THE NEED FOR EXPANDED EXPORT
MARKETS. LAST OCTOBER HE ANNOUNCED THAT THE GOVERNMEr'T HAD
DECIDED TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION
TO REPLACE THE EXISTING APPLE AND PEAR BOARD. THE CORPORATION
WILL BE ABLE TO TRADE IN ITS OWN RIGHT AND PLAY AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN RESEARCH AND PROMOTION. THE SEARCH FOR NEW~ MARKETS
WILL BE AN IMPORTANT -TASK OF THE NEW CORPORATION. IN
ADDITION, THE GOVERNMENT HAS MADE EMERGENCY PAYMENTS
TOTALLING $ 2.1 MILLION TO ASSIST APPLE EXPORTEPS ADVERSELY
AFFECTED BY THE REVALUATION OF THE DOLLAR. SUPPLEMENTARY
GRANTS OF $ 1,000 WILL ALSO BE MADE TO FARMERS GROWING
EXPORT APPLES WHO MAY BE IN EXTREME FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES.
I SHOULD SAY THAT NO ONE UNDERSTANDS YOUR PROBLEMS BETTFR
OR HAS DONE MORE FOR THE LONG-TERN INTERESTS OF PRIMARY
PRODUCERS IN THIS COUNTRY, THAN YOUR FELLOW-TASMANIAN,
KEN WRIEDT. I BELIEVE HE IS HELD IN UNIVERSAL RESPECT
THROUGHOUT THIS STATE AND THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, / 12 
12
NEXT, I MENTION OUR POLICY ON WATER RESOURCES.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS PUBLISHED A DOCUMENT, " A NATIONAL
APPROACH TO WATER RESOUIRCES MANAGEMENT", WHICH SETS OUT
A NUMBER OF OBJECTIVES AND PROPOSED COURSES OF ACTION
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
AUSTRALIA'S WATER RESOURCES. A MEETING OF STATE AND
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MINISTERS IN MELBOURNE ON ILI DECEMBER
ENDORSED OUR CONCEPT OF A NATIONAL WATER POLICY, AND FURTHER
DISCUSSIONS WILL BE HELD ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THAT
POLICY, YOUR PREMIER HAS SOUGHT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE FOR THE NORTH WESTERN REGIONAL-WATER SCHEME,
WHICH WILL AUGMENT THE WATER SUPPLIES OF SEVERAL TOWNS
IN THE BURNIE-DEVONPORT AREA. CONSULTATIONS ON THIS
PROJECT WILL BE UNDERTAKEN SHORTLY.
INi THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR IMPORTANT MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES, ESPECIALLY THOSE BASED ON YOUR MINERAL AND TIMBER
RESOURCES, my GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES
IMPOSED BY HIGH TRANSPORT COSTS FETWEENj TASMANIA AND THE
MAINLAND. ON 30 NOVEMBER LAST YEAR I ANNOUNCED THE APPOINTMENT
OF MR J. F. NIMMO, FORMER SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING,
AS A ROYAL COMMISSIONER TO UNDERTAKE AN INGUIRY INTO THE IMPACT
OF FREIGHT RATES ON THE TASMANIAN ECONOMY. WE HAVE ALSO
ANNOUNCED THAT MR M. M. SUMMERS, FORMER SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORT, WILL INQUIRE INTO THE LONG-TERM DEVELOPMENT OF
THE MARITIME INDUSTRY. AM HOPEFUL THAT BOTH THESE INQUIRIES
WILL BENEFIT TASMANIA,. .113 
73
I MENTION OUP IMPORTANT DECISION TO MOVE IHE
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ANTARCTIC DIVISION OF THE DEPARTMErT
OF SCIENCE TO HOBART. THE DIVISION WILL MOVE INTO A NEW
UNIFIED COMPLEX TO COST AROUND 17 MILLION AND EXPECTED TO
BE COMPLETED IN 1977. THIS WILL BE A MAJOR DECENTRALISATION
OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT, MIUCH OF THE
DIVISION IS BUDGET OF MORE THAN $ 7 MILLION A YEAR WILL PE.
SPENT IN TASMANIA PURCHASING SUPPLIES FOR EXPEDITIONS
AND SHIPS, HOBART WAS CHOSEN nECAUSE OF ITS EXCELLENT
PORT FACILITIES AND GREATER PROXIMITY TO THE ANTARCTIC.
THE RESULT WILL BE A MORE FRECUENT USE OF H4OBART BY THE
POLAR VESSELS ON CHARTER TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THE UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA, WHICH HAS HAD A LONG ASSOCIATION
WITH THE DIVISION IN RESEARCH WORK ON COSMIC RAYS, WILL BE
ABLE TO CO-OPERATE MORE CLOSELY IN OTHER AREAS OF RESEARCH
AND BUILD UP ITS ALREADY CONSIDERABLE SCIENTIFIC REPUTATION.
THE ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, SIR
GEORGE CARTLAND, AND THE ACADEMIC STAFF OF THE UNI/ ErsiTY
TO THE TRANSFER OF THE DIVISION UNDERLINES THE LONG-TERM
IMPORTANCE THAT THEY SEE IN THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISION,
IREFER NEXT TO OUR SPECIAL ENCOURAGEMENT FOR TOURISM
IN TASMANIA. WE ESTABLISHED A NEW DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND
RECREATION AND LAST YEAR THE MINISTER APPROVED A GRANT OF
$ 95,000 To TASMANIA TOWARDS THE RESTORATION AND. CON'/ ERSIOM OF
THE HISTORIC ASYLUM AT PORT ARTHUR. WE HAVE APPROVED CRAMTVS,
ON A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BANIS WITH THE STATES, TO DEV'EL. OP YOUTH
HOSTELS FOR YOUNG TRAVELLERS. / J L! 
1L
FINALLY I MENTION THE IMPORTANT WORK OF THE CSIRO
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE IN CHECKING AND MONITORING
MERCURY POLLUTION IN THE DERWENT; LAST YEAR OUR LABORATORIES
IN TASMANIA DETECTED A HIGH LEVEL OF MERCURY IN SOME TYPES
OF FISH AND WARNINGS WERE ISSUED TO THE PUBLIC BY THE
TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT, THE DEPARTMENTS OF SCIENCE AND HEALTH
ARE MAKING A CONTINUING INVESTIGATION INTO THE PRESFtCE OF
MERCURY AND BROMIDE IN HOUSEHOLD FOODS.
I KNOW THAT A SMALL STATE SUCH AS YOURS HAS SPECIAL
PROELEMS IN KEEPING PACE WITH THE DEVELOPMENT AND LIVING STANDARDS
OF THE LARGER STATES. SO LET ME CONCLUDE WITH SOME REFERENCE
TO THE MEASURES WE ARE TAKING TO ENSURE GREATER EOUALITY AND
FAIRNESS IN THE ALLOCATION OF OUR NATIONAL RESOURCES. THESE
RELATE SPECIALLY TO THE AREA OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. TASMANIANS
ARE WELL AWARE OF THE IMPORTANT ROLE OF THE COMMONWEALTH GRANTS
COMMISSION IN REDRESSING THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN THE STATES.
YOU ALSO HAVE DIRECT EXPERIENCE OF INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
WITHIN YOUR STATE, FOR SMALL AS TASMANIA IS IN GEOGRAPHICAL TERMS,
THERE ARE AREAS WITHIN IT WHICH ARE MARKEDLY LESS DEVELOPED, LESS
PROSPEROUS, THAN OTHERS. IT IS FOR THAT REASON THAT MY
GOVERNMENT DECIDED LAST YEAR TO WIDEN THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
GRANTS COMMISSION TO ENABLE IT TO GIVE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A REGIONAL EDsIS. APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE
HAVE BEEN MADE AND I EXPECT THE COMMISSION TO COMPLETE ITS HEARINGS
ABOUT THE END OF MAY, WITH RECOVtlENDATIONS IN TIME FOR THE
1.974-75 BUDGET, I 
15
OUR OTHER INITIATIVE IS DESIGNED TO GIVE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT A VOICE AND A VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL AND TO
ENABLE THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT TO BORROW MONEY ON BEHALF
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND CRANT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE DIRECT
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, THIS WILL BE POSSIBLE IF OUR
REFERENDUM ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS APPROVED IN MAY, I STRESS
THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS PROPOSAL TO TASMANIA, YOUR " TATE
HAS MANY SPECIAL NEEDS WHICH ONLY LOCAL GOVERNMENT CAN SUPPLY,
IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT TASMANIA'S DEVELOPMENT KEEPS UP
WITH THE OTHER'STATES. IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT THE FINANCIAL
RESOURCES OF THE NATION ARE FULLY AND EFFECTIVELY USED
FOR THE WELFARE OF THE SMALLER STATES AND THE REGIONS
WITHIN IT, IF WE ARE TO ENSURE THAT TASMANIA AND TASMANIANS
HAVE JUST AND PROPER ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES OF THE
NATION AND THAT THESE RESOURCES ARE USED WHERE THEY ARE
MOST NEEDED, THEN I URGE YOU TO SUPPORT THE REFERENDUM
WE SHALL BE PUTTING TO THE PEOPLE IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE
SENATE ELECTIONS, THERE WILL NO LONGER BE ANY NEED FOR
A SMALL STATE TO BE DISADVANTAGED OR FOR REGIONS WITHIN
THAT STATE TO BE DEPRIVED, BY THIS REFERENDUM I HOPE
TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED AS A FULL AND EQUAL
PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM, IN THE SAME WAY, AND WITH
THE ASSISTANCE AND CONTINUED SUPPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, I BELIEVE TASMANIA WILL PROSPER AS A FULL
AND EQUAL PARTNER IN OUR FEDERATION, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
FOR THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE, HOBART,
FRIDAY$ 22 FEBRUARY 1974
THIS IS THE FIRST MAJOR ADMINlISTRATIVE BUILDING
ERECTED IN TASMANIA BY ANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE
FEDERATION. THE NEED FOR THE BUILDING AROSE IN THE LATE
1960s WHEN THE LACK OF SUITABLE PREMISES AVAILABLE FOR
LEASING FORCED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO BUY LAND
AND PLAN THE BUILDING. ITS CONSTRUCTION IS VERY MUCH
IN ACCORD WITH THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON OFFICIAL
BUILDINGS$ THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN FAF. D WITH
AN INCREASING RENT BILL WHEREVER IT 0AINTAINS OFFICES.
IN MANY AREAS I. EASING HAS RESULTED IN ITS OFFICES BiNCG
UNDULY SCATTERED. THE GOVERNMENT HAS THERZFORE SiATED
THAT ITS FUTURE POLICY WILL FAVOUR GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP,
THE SITE FOR THE NEW AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CENTRE
IS PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT AS IT IS ON THE FRINGE OF HOBART'S
RETAIL BUSINESS CENTRE, YET NEAR ITS EXPANDING
ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL CENTRE. IT IS READILY
ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC USING EITtIIR PRIVATE CARS OR PUBLIC
TRANSPORT$ THUS, IN THIS ONE BUILDING, THE GREATER PORTION
OF THE COMMONWEALTH'S ADMINISTRATIVE AND W8LFARE SERVICES
IN HOBART WILL BE EASILY AVAILABLE TO THE CITIZENS OF THE CITY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS TO BE HOUSED IN THE
BUILDING INCLUDE SOCIAL SECURITY, IMMIGRATION AND LABOUR AND
THE AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE. 
-2-
THE GOVERNMENT CENTRE, BUILT AT A COST OF $ 5,2 MILLION,
IS ONE OF SEVERAL BUILDING PROJECTS PLANNED FOR HOBART BY
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, A MULTI-STORY BUILDING IS
PROPOSED ON THE SITE ADJACENT TO THE EXISTING HOBART CENTRAL
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE, THE GROWTH OF THE NUMBER OF TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBERS IN THE HOBART AREA HAS PUT GREAT PRESSURE ON
EXISTING FACILITIES, A MAIL EXCHANGE AND TRANSPORT COMPLEX
IS ALSO PROPOSED FOR THE CITY,
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE ANNOUNCED ON 25 JANUARY THAT
THE ANTARCTIC DIVISION OF HIS DEPARTMENT WILL MOVE ITS
HEADQUARTERS TO HOBART. THE DIVISION IS NOW DISPERSED OVER
SIX LOCATIONS IN MELBOURNE AND HOBART, A NEW UNIFIED COMPLEX
TO COST ABOUT $ 3 MILLION IS EXPECTED TO BE COMPLETED IN 1977,
THIS IS NOT JUST A MATTER OF MOVING BUILDINGS NOROF THEEXPENDITURE
OF ABOUT $ 3 MILLION ON THE HEADQUARTERS,
YOUR EXCELLENT PORT FACILITIES WILL BENEFIT FROM MOUNTING
THE ANNUAL EXPEDITIONS TO THE ANTARCTIC, THE UNIVERSITY
OF TASMANIA WHICH HAS HAD A LONG ASSOCIATION WITH THE DIVISION
IN RESEARCH WORK ON COSMIC RAYS WILL BE IN A POSITION TO
CO-OPERATE MORE CLOSELY IN OTHER AREAS OF RESEARCH AND
BUILD UP ITS SCIENTIFIC REPUTATION, T; IE ENTHUSIASTIC RESPONSE
OF THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, SIR GEORGE CATLAND, AND THE ACADEMIC
STAFF OF THE UNIVERSITY TO THE TRANSFER OF THL DIVISION
UNDERLINES THE LONG-TERM IMPORTANCE THAT THEY SEE IN MY
GOVERNMENT'S DECISION, 
WE WILL BE CO-OPERATING CLOSELY WITH THE TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE HOBART COUNCIL AND OTHER AUTHORITIES IN THE SITING
AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE HEADQUARTERS, WE ARE ANXIOUS TO ADD
TO AND NOT DETRACT FROM THE GREAT CHARM OF YOUR CAPITAL,
IN ADDITION, A NEW MULTI-STORY BUILDING; DUE TO BE
COMPLETED IN SEPTEMBER 1975, IS BEING CONSTRUCTED AT THE
REPATRIATION GENERAL HOSPITAL, HOBART, AT A COST OF
MILLION, THIS BUILDING WILL CONTAIN TWO THIRTY-BED
WARDS PREVIOUSLY HOUSED IN 50 YEAR OLD PREMISES, PARAMEDICAL
FACILITIES AND NURSING STAFF ACCOMMODATION. NURSING AIDE
TRAINING WILL BE UNDERTAKEN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN TASMANIA
AT TIHIS HOSPITAL. THIS TRAINING IS AT PRESENT BEING
UNDERTAKEN IN VICTORIA AND, AS THIS RESULTS IN HIGH WASTAGE,
THE NEW ARRANGEMENTS ARE EXPECTED TO HELP RETAIN THESE. SKILLS
LOCALLY, IN LINE WITH PRESENT POLICY, ANY SPARE BED CAPACITY
AT THE HOSPITAL WILL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNITY GENERALLY,
THE NEW BUILDING ACTIVITY IS IN LINE WITH A GENERALLY
GREATER AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EMPHASIS ON TASMANIA, IT HAS
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED ITS EXPENDITURE IN HOBART AND THE
REST OF TASMANIA IN THE LAST YEAR, TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE
TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973/ 74, FOR ALL PURPOSES AND INCLUDING
THE STATE'S LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAM, ARE ESTIMATED TO TOTAL ABOUT
$ 228 MILLION, 
THIS IS AN INCREASE OF ABOUT $ 32 MILLION OR 16 PER CENT
OVER PAYMENTS IN 1972/ 73, IT REPRESENTS MORE THAN $ 570
PER HEAD OF POPULATION IN TASMANIA, COMPARED TO AVERAGE
PAYMENTS TO ALL STATES OF ABOUT $ 337 PER HEAD. THIS IS
ONE INDICATOR OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RECOGNITION
OF THE SPECIAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS OF TASMANIA.
TWO AREAS THAT HAVE BENEFITED PARTICULARLY FROM A
MUCH GREATER INFUSION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS ARE
HOUSING AND EDUCATION, ADVANCES TOTALLING $ 16.3 MILLION
WILL BE MADE TO TASMANIA IN 1973/ 74 UNDER THE NEW HOUSING
AGREEMENT WITH THE STATES. THIS IS AN INCREASE OF NO LESS
THAN 82 PER CENT OVER THE CORRESPONDIN, ALLOCATION IN
1972/ 73, THE PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING AGREEMENT IS TO ASSIST
TASMANIA AND OTHER STATES TO PROVIDE MORE HOUSING FOR NEEDY
PERSONS. FOR EDUCATION, TASMANIA IS EXPEC: TED TO RECEIVE GRpi'iFS
TOTALLING ALMOST $ 19 MILLION IN 1973/ 74. THIS IS AN INCREASE
OF 111 PER CENT OVER THE PRECEDING YEAR. IN 1972/ 73 THE
COMPARABLE INCREASE WAS ONLY 12 PER CEN1, THIS MASSIVE
INCREASE WILL PROVIDE MORE MONEY FOR UNIVERSITIES, COLLEGES
OF ADVANCED EDUCATION, TEACHERS' COLLFGES, TECHNICAL COLLEGES,
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND PRE-SCHOOLS, iN THE SPECIFIC
FIELDS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION TASMANIA WILL
RECEIVE A TOTAL OF $ 20 MILLION IN 1974 AND 197j, FOLLOWING
THE GENERAL ACCEPTANCE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVCRN I[ WNI OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE. THE FIRST PAYMENT
UNDER THE STATES GRANTS ( SCHOOLS) ACT 1973 $ 962,000 FOR THE
FIRST QUARTER OF 1974 HAS ALREADY BEEN MADE. 
THIS BUILDING IS A TANGIBLE SYMBOL OF THE EXPANDED
ACTIVITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN TASMANIA. WE HAVE
DIRECTED OUR POLICIES IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS TO ENSURING
THAT THIS STATE SHARES IN THE BENEFITS OF THE NEW
INITIATIVES WHICH WE ARE TAKING THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
WE WILL CONTINUE TO DIRECT OUR POLICIES TO THAT. END.
L 



ex pp~ g
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C. 1M. P.,
AT A PUBLIC MEETING AT MITCHAM HIGH SCHOOL, MELBOURNE,
FRIDAY 1 MARCH 1974
IT IS WITH A SPECIAL SENSE OF PLEASURE THAT I COME TO
THE EASTERN AREA OF MELBOURNE TONIGHT. FOR IT IS THIS AREA WHICH
PLAYED A VITAL ROLE ON 2 DECEMBER 1972 INTHE ELECTION OF THE FIRST
NATIONAL LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 23 YEARS. WE NEEDED TO W IN FOUR
SEATS TO GAIN GOVERNMENT. ONLY ABOUT AN HOUR AFTER THE-START OF
COUNTING ON THAT NIGHT IT WAS OBVIOUS THAT WE WOULD WIN THESE
SEATS IN THIS AREA. WE KNEW THEN THAT CASEY, HOLT, DIAMOND VALLEY
AND LA TROBE HAD . GONE To LABOR. OUR GAINS ELSEWHERE WOULD
CONSTITUTE OUR WORKING MAJORITYo OUR SAFETY MARGIN.
ONE . OF THE VICTORIES HERE GAVE ME PARTICULAR SATISFACTION;
IT MEANT THAT RACE MATHEWS, WHO, AS MY PRIVATE SECRETARY HAD DONE
SO MUCH TO DEVELOP OUR POLICIES FOR GOVERNMENT, WOULD ENTER
PARLIAMENT AS THE MEMBER FOR CASEY. NO LEADER WOULD HAVE BEEN
LESS THAN DELIGHTED BY THE KNOWLEDGE THAT HE WOULD TAKE HIS SEAT
ALONGSIDE MAX OLDMEADOW, DAVID MCK( ENZIE AND TONY LArM. As
CANDIDATES THEY PROMISED TO BE EXCELLENT MEMBERS; AS MEMBERS
THEY HAVE ALREADY PROVED THEIR EXCELLENCE. . a a/ 2 
-2-
NO PART OF AUSTRALIA PROVIDES A BETTER INDICATION OF WHY
WE WON THE ELECTION THAN THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF MELBOURNE. THEY
HAVE SEEN PHENOMENAL GROWTH IN THE POST-WAR YEARS BUT WITH THIS
GROWTH HAVE COME A HOST OF PROBLEMS. OUR SCHOOLS, OUR HOSPITALS,
OUR HEALTH SERVICES, OUR TRANSPORT FACILITIES, OUR COMMUNITY
SERVICES HAVE NOT KEPT PACE WITH THE GREAT EXPANSION OF OUR
MAJOR CITIES. THIS WAS PLAIN TO THE VOTERS OF THESE SUBURBS AND
THEY MADE THEIR AWARENESS EQUALLY PLAIN WITH THEIR VOTES. THEY
KNEW THAT NO PROMISE MADE BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT COULD
COMPENSATE FOR 23 YEARS OF NEGLECT AND MIS-MANAGEMENT. THEY KNEW
THAT ONLY AUSTRALIA'S LARGEST AND MOST REPRESENTATIVE POLITICAL
PARTY THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAD DRAWN UP PROGRAMS TO TACKLE
THE MAMMOTH PROBLEMS OF OUR CITIES.
THEY ALSO KNEW THAT ONLY THE LABOR PARTY WOULD BE GUIDED
BY THE PRINCI-PLES OF EQUALITY AND EQUITY IN ITS APPROACH TO THESE
PROBLEMS. THOSE PRINCIPLES HAVE REMAINED OUR BEACON IN THE
MONTHS SINCE-THE PEOPLE OF THIS AND OTHER AREAS OF AUSTRALIA
RECORDED THEIR SUPPORT FOR THEM. IN ALL THAT WE HAVE DONE IN THAT
TIME WE HAVE SOUGHT TO MEASURE UP TO THE IDEAL CONTAINED IN MY
ELECTION POLICY SPEECH WHEN I SAID: " IT'S TIME FOR A NEW TEAM,
A NEW PROGRAM, A NEW DRIVE FOR EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITIES; IT'S
TIME TO CREATE NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS.-TIME FOR A NEW
VISION OF WHAT WE CAN ACHIEVE IN THIS GENERATION FOR OUR NATION
AND THE REGION IN WHICH WE LIVE." s @/ 3 
-3-
IN THAT SAME SPEECH I SAID THAT OUR PROGRAM WAS
AMBITIOUS, AND THAT WE COULD NOT BE EXPECTED TO CLEAR AWAY THE
BACKLOG OF 23 YEARS IN 3 MONTHS OR EVEN 3 YEARS, A START, HOWEVER,
HAS BEEN MADE AND, IN LINE WITH OUR GOAL OF SHARED OPPORTUNITY
AND PROSPERITY FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS, WE HAVE SET OUR NATION ON
A NEW COURSE, I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE ALREADY DONE ENOUGH TO
ENSURE THAT THERE CAN BE NO TURNINGBACK FROM THAT COURSE,
LET US LOOK AT THE ACHIEVEMENTS THAT JUSTIFY SUCH A
PRONOUNCEMENT. THERE CAN BE NO GREATER JUSTIFICATION THAN OUR
ACHIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, WE HAVE RAISED THE EDUCATIONAL
HORIZONS OF THE VAST MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, WE HAVE
TAKEN THE FIRST MAJOR STEPS TO FULFIL OUR OBJECTIVE OF BRINGING
HIGHER STANDARDS OF EDUCATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN
EDUCATION TO EVERY CHILD AT EVERY LEVEL FROM PRE-SCHOOL TO
TERTIARY, IN ITS FIRST BUDGET THE GOVERNV: ENT COMMITTED
$ 843 MILLION TO EDUCATION FOR 1973/ 74 ALMOST DOUBLE THE AMOUNT
GIVEN BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN 1972/ 73. THE ALLOCATION FOR
GOVERNMENT AND NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN
VICTORIA ALONE IS $ 57.7 MILLION AN INCREASE OF 153 PER CENT,
WE HAVE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY
EDUCATION AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES, FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE
GIVING ASSISTANCE TO TEACHERS COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS
COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION; WE WILL SPEND $ 188 : IILLION ON TEACHER
EDUCATION IN THE TWO AND A HALF YEARS FROM 1 JULY LAST YEAR,
WE ARE GIVING MUCH MORE GENEROUS ALLOWANCES TO STUDENTS AND WE
HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS, ,/ 4 
IN'THE SPECIFIC FIELDS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
WE WILL MAKE AVAILABLE A TOTAL OF $ 700 MILLION TO ALL SCHOOLS IN
1974 AND 1975. OF EQUAL IMPORTANCE TO THIS GREAT INCREASE IN FUNDS,
IS OUR ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT SCHOOLS COMMISSION TO GIVE AID
TO ALL SCHOOLS WITHOUT DISTINCTION ON A " tNEEDS" i BASIS.. THIS WILL
BE A MECHANISM BY WHICH WE WILL SEEK TO ENSURE EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.
IBELIEVE THAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS RIGHT TO BE PROUD OF
SUCH ADVANCES. IT MUST BE RECOGNISEDi HOWEVER, THAT. MUCH OF THE
DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION OF OUR NEW PROGRAMS IN EDUCATION WILL
DEPEND UPON THE PLANNING AND CO-OPERATION OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
AND NON-GOVERNMENT EDUCATION AUTHORITIES. FOR THIS REASON I AM
DIST IURBED AT THE PROPAGANDA EMANATING FROM CERTAIN STATE GOVERNMENTS
THAT THE FUNDS PROVIDED FOR 1974 AND 1975 ARE RIGIDLY EAR-MARKED.
IT IS TRUE THAT ABOUT $ 44 MILLION IS ASSIGNED To GOVERNMENT
DISADVANTAGED SCHOOLS THAT IS TO AREAS OF PAST CHRONIC NEGLECT
AND UNDER-ACHIEVEMENT. IT IS TRUE THAT $ 20 MILLION ALLOTTED
TO BUILDING PROJECTS FOR SCHOOLS FOR THE HANDICAPPED AND NEARLY
$ 9 MILLION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND RETRAINING OF TEACHERS OF THESE
CHILDREN. IT IS TRUE THAT $ 16 MILLION IS ALLOTTED TO PRIMARY
SCHOOL LIBRARIES WHICH HAVE RECEIVED NO DIRECT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SUPPORT IN THE PAST AND MORE THAN $ 17 MILLION IS ALLOCATED TO
SECONDARY LIBRARIES. SURELY NO ONE WOULD DISPUTE THE SPECIAL NEEDS
I N THESE AREAS; SURELY NO ONE WOULD CRITICISE A GOVERNMENT FOR
A DETERMINATION TO MEET THESE NEEDS. EVEN ALLOWING FOR THIS SPECIFIC
GRANT, IT IS ABSURD TO TALK ABOUT RIGIDITY WHEN A GLANCE AT THE
STATES GRANTS ( SCHOOLS) ACT SHOWS THAT THE STATES WILL RECEIVE
$ 100 MILLION IN GENERAL BUILDING GRANTS AND $ 174 MILLION IN GRANTS
FOR GENERAL RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS. 
IT IS BREATHTAKING EFFRONTERY FOR STATE LIBERAL MINISTERS,
WHO SUPPORTED A LIBERAL GOVERNMENT MAKING GRANTS TO STATE SCHOOLS
AT THE RATE OF $ 32 MILLION A YEAR WITHOUT A COMPLAINT, TO SUGGEST
INDIFFERENCE ON THE PART OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHOSE GRANTS
TO STATE SCHOOLS REPRESENTS SOMETHING LIKE A EIGHT-FOLD INCREASE
CRITICAL WORDS ARE ONE THING; ACTIONS ARE ANOTHER. THE
MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, MR BEAZLEY, HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
TO ENSURE THAT EDUCATION AUTHORITIES IMPLEMENT THE " NEEDS" POLICY
WITH INTEGRITY. HE HAS BEEN INFORMED HE HOPES INCORRECTLY
THAT ONE STATE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, IN HIS ALLOCATION OF THE
EXTRA MONEY PROVIDED FOR DISADVANTAGED SCHOOLS, IS OFFERING A MERE
$ 2,000 EACH TO THE PRINCIPALS OF A VAST RANGE OF SCHOOLSo INCLUDING
A NUMBER WHICH ARE CLEARLY DISADVANTAGED. HE HAS ALSO BEEN
INFORMED AGAIN HE HOPES INCORRECTLY THAT THIS MINISTER IS
IDENTIFYING AS DISADVANTAGED SOME ALREADY EXCELLENT HIGH SCHOOLS,
INCLUDING ONE WHICH, IN THE CONSTITUENCY OF A FORMER MINISTER
FOR EDUCATION OF THE STATE, WAS A RECIPIENT OF SPECIAL ADVANTAGES
IN THE PAST. WE WANT FROM EDUCATION AUTHORITIES A CLEAR STATEMENT
ON THEIR CRITERIA OF DISADVANTAGE AND A CLEAR CONCENTRATION OF
THE DISADVANTAGED EXPENDITURE ON SLUM SCHOOLS TO BRING THEM UP TO
STANDARD. 
-6-
BEFORE I LEAVE THE SUBJECT OF EDUCATION, I WOULD LIKE TO
MENTION ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR CHILDREN
WHO HAVE TOO OFTEN SUFFERED NEGLECT IN THE PAST. I HAVE ALREADY
MENTIONED OUR ALLOCATION FOR BUILDING PROJECTS FOR SCHOOLS FOR
THE HANDICAPPED. IN THE LAST FORTNIGHT, THE CABINET HAS DECIDED
TO APPROPRIATE A FURTHER $ 1 MILLION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION APPLIED
SPECIFICALLY FOR RESEARCH AND FOR THE TRAINING OF TEACHERS OF
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN. ULTIMATELY THIS WILL PRODUCE " THE TEACHERS
OF THE TEACHERS" OF THE HANDICAPPED AND THIS IS A CONCOMITANT OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE TO SCHOOLS FOR THE
HANDICAPPED. I WOULD ALSO STRESS THAT THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION IS
OBLIGED TO HAVE REGARD TO " THE EDUCATIONAL NEEDS OF HANDICAPPED
CHILDREN AND HANDICAPPED YOUNG PERSONS.
AT THE OTHER END OF THE SPECTRUM OF PERSONAL FORTUNE, THE
SCHOOLS COMMISSION IS CHARGED WITH THE RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARTING
COURSES OF ACTION WHICH WILL PROVIDE " SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR STUDENTS WHO HAVE DEMONSTRATED THEIR ABILITY IN
A PARTICULAR FIELD OF STUDIES, INCLUDING SCIENTIFIC, LITERARY,
ARTISTIC OR MUSICAL STUDIES." THE SCHOLARSHIP SCHEMES OF AUSTRALIA
HAVE OFTEN AWARDED MONEY BUT NOT OPPORTUNITIES FOR GENIUS OR TALENT
IN SUCH AREAS TO PROCEED AT THE PACE OF THAT GENIUS AND TALENT AND THIS
IS ONE OF THE MOST BAFFLING BUT FASCINATING PROBLEMS IN EDUCATION.
IT REACHED ITS EXTREME IN A PRODIGY WHO, IN THE UNITED STATES, COULD
LECTURE IN MATHEMATICS AT A UNIVERSITY AT THE AGE OF SEVEN, BUT WHO
ALSO BELIEVED IN FATHER CHRISTMAS. THIS MAY HELP TO REMIND US THAT
INTELLECTUAL BRILLIANCE DOES NOT NECESSARILY MEAN SOCIAL MATURITY
AND THAT SUCH A CHILD IS IN NEED OF SPECIAL ATTENTION. .1/ 7 
-7-
EQUALITY AND EQUITY HAVE BEEN JUST AS MUCH THE PRINCIPAL
FORCES BEHIND THE GOVERNMENT's POLICIES FOR THE PROVISION OF HEALTH
SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA. OUR HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM IS PROOF
ENOUGH OF THIS, AND I WILL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT IT SHORTLY. As
MUCH PROOF CAN BE FOUND IN THE WORK OF THE HOSPITALS AND-HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION WHICH WE ESTABLISHED LAST YEAR. FOR TOO LONG*
THE SITING OF HOSPITALS HAS IGNORED-THE POPULATI* ON TRENDS OF OUR
COUNTRY. FOR TOO LONG PEOPLE IN OUTER URBAN AREAS HAVE HAD TO PUT
UP WITH TRAVELLING MILES TO RECEIVE ADEQUATE HOSPITAL TREATMENT.
FOR TOO LONG NEWLY-DEVELOPED AREAS HAVE HAD TO SUFFER A SHORTAGE
OF DOCTORS. MY COLLEAGUE MAX OLDMEADOW HAS TOLD ME OF. ONE AREA IN
HIS ELECTORATE WITH 18,000 PEOPLE AND ONLY TWO FULL-TIME GENERAL
PRACTITIONERS. THROUGH THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION WE
ARE DETERMINED TO OVERCOME THIS GROTESQUELY UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF
SUCH ESSENTIAL SERVICES. THE COMMISSION IS CURRENTLY EXAMINING
HOSPITAL NEEDS AND WILL PRESENT A REPORT AS A BASIS FOR GOVERNMENT
ACTION IN APRIL. IN ADDITION, WE HAVE INTRODUCED A MAJOR PROGRAM
FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES, WHICH, AMONG
OTHER THINGS,-WILL MAKE AVAILABLE DOCTORS IN AREAS WHERE THEY ARE
CURRENTLY IN SHORT SUPPLY. IN VICTORI A WE EXPECT TO SPEND
$ 4.2 MILLION IN 1973/ 74 ON SUCH COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES. PART
OF OUR PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST THE STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL
HEALTH, ALCHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY SERVICES. THE ALLOCATION
OF MORE THAN $ 77,000 FOR THE JANEFIELD FAMILY ASSESSMENT UNIT AT
BUNDOORA A CENTRE WHERE WHOLE FAMILIES CAN BE BROUGHT FOR THE
ASSESSMENT OF PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH MENTAL DEFICIENCIES IS A
GOOD EXAMPLE OF THIS PROGRAM IN ACTION IN THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF
MELBOURNE. 
-8-
ANOTHER IS THE PROVISION OF NEARLY $ 80,000 FOR THE DANDENONG
COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTRE AND TEACHING UNIT IN CONJUNCTION
WITH MONASH UNIVERSITY.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS . ALSO RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR GREATLY
EXPANDED ACTIVITY IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL SECURITY. WE INCREASED
PENSIONS TWICE LAST YEAR AND WILL LIFT THEM AGAIN IN THE AUTUMN.
WE HAVE TAKEN THE FIRST STEP TOWARDS THE ABOLITION OF THE MEANS
TEST. WE HAVE INTRODUCED A NUMBER OF NEW BENEFITS AND IMPROVED
A NUMBER OF EXISTING ONES. THESE RANGE FROM INCREASES IN SUBSIDIES
FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES TO GREATER ENCOURAGEMENT FOR HOME CARE
SERVICES; FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF A SUPPORTING MOTHERS BENEFIT
TO THE PROVISION OF AN ORPHAN'IS PENSION. ONE OF OUR MOST AMBITIOUS
PROJECTS IS TO DEVISE AN AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN TO ENABLE LOCAL
AUTHORITIES AND VOLUNTARY AGENCIES TO SHARE THE COST OF A WIDER
RANGE OF WELFARE SERVICES. THE FIRST GRANTS UNDER THE NEW PLAN
AFFECTING VICTORIA WERE ANNOUNCED BY THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY
IN OCTOBER. INITIALLY THE GRANTS ARE FOR SETTING UP SECRETARIATS
FOR SOCIAL PLANNING WHICH IN TURN WILL LEAD TO THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT. OF THE SIX INITIAL
GRANTS, WHICH TOTALLED $ 91,000, A GRANT OF $ 10,000 A YEAR HAS
BEEN MADE TO THE MELBOURNE/ OUTER EASTERN SUBURBS INTERIM COMMITTEE.
IMENTIONED A MOMENT AGO THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION AND
INADEQUACY OF HEALTH SERVICES IN OUR MAJOR CITIES. THIS IS ONLY ONE
ASPECT OF THE PROBLEMS THAT OUR HUGE URBAN AREAS-FACE. IT IS ONLY
ONE ASPECT OF PROGRAMS WHICH WE HAVE INITIATED TO OVERCOME THESE PROBLEMSe 289/ 9 
-9-
WE HAVE EMBARKED ON A LONG-RANGE PROGRAM TO MAKE AUSTRALIAN
CITIES -EXISTING ONES AND NEW ONES AND THEIR SUBURBS MORE
EFFICIENT, MORE ORDERLY AND MORE BEAUTIFUL. THE DEPARTMENT OF
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT WAS CREATED LESS THAN THREE WEEKS
AFTER WE CAME INTO OFFICE AS THE MAJOR POLICY ARM OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN URBAN AFFAIRS. THE CITIES COMMISSION WAS SET UP TO
PROVIDE TOWN PLANNING AND OTHER PRACTICAL SKILLS FOR DEVELOPING
EXISTING CITIES AND PLANNING NEW GROWTH CENTRES. THE FIRST FRUITS
OF THESE MEASURES HAVE COME WITH THE PLANNING OF A MAJOR CENTRE
IN ALBURY-WODONGA. THIS AND OTHER FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS ARE AIMED AT
RELIEVING OUR EXISTING CITIES, PARTICULARLY MELBOURNE AND SYDNEYJ*
OF THE UNBEARABLE STRAINS CAUSED BY EXCESSIVE DEVELOPMENT.
IN FEBRUARY LAST YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED
A SCHEME TO IMPROVE URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN THE CAPITAL CITIES.
ISAID IN MY POLICY SPEECH THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT " MUST NOW
ACCEPT A SHARE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
OF AUSTRALIAN CITIES." THE SCHEME WE ANNOUNCED MORE THAN LIVES UP
TO THAT PLEDGE. IT IS BASED ON THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CONTRIBUTING TWO-THIRDS OF THE COST OF IMPROVING URBAN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AND LEAVING ONLY ONE-THIRD OF THE COST TO THE STATES.
SUGGESTED PROJECTS FOR A FIVE-YEAR PROGRAM HAVE BEEN SUBMITTED BY
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS INCLUDING VICTORIA. WHILE MOST OF THESE
PROPOSALS ARE BEING EVALUATED, WE HAVE ALREADY AGREED TO PROVIDE
$ 4.32 MILLION IN 1973/ 74 TO PROVIDE NEW TRAINS, TRAMS AND BUSES
IN THIS STATE. 
WE ARE THE FIRST GOVERNMENT TO RECOGNISE THAT ONE OF
THE MOST APPALLING EFFECTS OF THE RAPID GROWTH OF OUR CITIES HAS
BEEN THE INADEQUACY OF SEWERAGE SERVICES IN NEW SUBURBS. WE ARE
THE FIRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO ACCEPT A DIRECT RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THIS PROBLEM. THE BUDGET PROVIDED FOR AN ADVANCE OF.
MILLION TO HELP CATCH UP ON THE BACKLOG OF SEWERAGE. THIS
INCLUDES $ 9.3 MILLION FOR VICTORIA.' THE MELBOURNE AND METROPOLITAN
BOARD OF WORKS HAS ADVISED , US THAT $ 7.3 fvILLION OF THIS IS EXPECTED
TO BE ALLOCATED FOR MAJOR AND MINOR SEWERAGE WORKS IN THE EASTERN
SUBURBS OF MELBOURNE IN 1973/ 74. A LONG-TERM NATIONAL SEWERAGE
PROGRAM IS AT PRESENT UNDERGOING DETAILED NEGOTIATION. BETWEEN
THE VARIOUS STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS. THE PROGRAM
TO BE DEVELOPED IN VICTORIA IS EXPECTED TO ELIMINATE THE SEWERAGE
BACKLOG IN MAJOR URBAN AREAS BY 1982.
OUR'CITIES HAVE ALSO SUFFERED MIGHTILY FROM THE SHORTAGE
OF HOUSING. AGAIN WE HAVE MOVED TO DEAL WITH THIS PROBLEM. THE
TOTAL AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROVISION FOR HOUSING HAS GONE UP BY
34 PER CENT THIS FINANCIAL YEAR FROM $ 370 MILLION TO $ 495 MILLION.
ADVANCES TO THE STATES INCREASED By 29 PER CENT TO $ 219 MILLION;
VICTORIA RECEIVED $ 53.5 MILLION, COMPARED TO ONLY $ 39 MILLION IN
THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR. VICTORIA IS ADVANCED $ 16 MILLION IN
THE AGREEMENT UNDER THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT, WHICH IS USED FOR
TERMINATING BUILDING SOCIETY LOANS; THIS IS NEARLY $ 5 MILLION MORE
THAN IN THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR, AND WILL BE SPENT FOR HOMES
FOR SALE, NOT FOR RENTAL, AS STATE AUTHORITIES HAVE TRIED TO CLAIM. ./ 11 
-11-
THE HOUSING AUTHORITY ADVANCE FOR USE IN BUILDING HOUSING COMMISSION
HOMES FOR RENTAL AND PURCHASE ROSE IN 1973/ 74 TO $ 37.5 MILLION, AN
INCREASE OF NEARLY $ 10 MILLION ON THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR.
I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THESE LARGE INCREASES WERE THE AMOUNTS THE
VICTORIAN STATE GOVERNMENT-SOUGHT, LIMITED ONLY BY THE CAPACITY
OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY.
THESE GENEROUS ADVANCES WILL ENABLE VICTORIA* TO BUILD
3.000 HOUSING COMMISSION DWELLINGS THIS FINANCIAL YEAR A MAJOR
IMPROVEMENT ON THE NUMBERS BUILT WITH MONEY HANDED OUT BY OUR
PREDECESSORS. THE GREAT BULK OF THIS MONEY IS PROVIDED AT THE
HIGHLY CONCESSIONAL INTEREST RATE OF FOUR PER CENT FOR THE FIVE
YEARS OF THE AGREEMENT SURELY A SIGNIFICANT FIGURE WHEN THE BOND
RATE IS AROUND 8.5 PER CENT. THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT FUNDS
ALLOCATED TO EACH STATE WILL BE LOANED OUT TO HOMESEEKERS AT
INTEREST RATES NOT EXCEEDING FIVE AND THREE-QUARTER PER CENT.
HOUSING COMMISSION DWELLINGS ALSO MUST BE SOLD WITHIN THIS INTEREST
RATE LIMIT, SO IT CAN BE READILY SEEN THAT THE NEW AGREEMENT GIVES
SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL AID TO THOSE WHO HAVE TO BUY THEIR HOMES
WITHIN THE PUBLIC HOUSING SECTOR.
WE HAVE TAKEN SEVERAL OTHER IMPORTANT STEPS IN THE HOUSING
FIELD. WE ARE WORKING ON A UNIFORM BUILDING REGULATIONS CODE WHICH
MAY EVENTUALLY REDUCE HOUSING COSTS BY AS MUCH AS SIX PER CENT.
A TASK FORCE INVESTIGATING SYSTEMS OF FACTORY PRODUCED HOUSING HAS
ALREADY PRODUCED AN INTERIM REPORT, AND IT MAY PROVE POSSIBLE TO
ACHIEVE SAVINGS AS HIGH As 20 PER CENT FOR A COTTAGE IF THESE NEW
HOUSING TECHNIQUES CAN EFFECTIVELY BE UTILISED IN THE FUTURE. 
-12-
THE SCOPE OF THE DEFENCE SERVICES HOMES SCHEME HAS BEEN GREATLY
WIDENED, AND THE MAXIMUM LOAN LIMIT RAISED FROM $ 9,000 TO $ 12,000.
SPENDING ON DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES THIS FINANCIAL YEAR HAS INCREASED
BY 37 PER CENT TO $ 102 MILLION, ABORIGINAL HOUSING ALLOCATIONS HAVE
INCREASED THIS FINANCIAL YEAR" BY 123 PER CENT TO $ 32,4 MILLION,
WE ARE PHASING OUT THE INEQUITABLE HOME SAVINGS GRANT SCHEMEI AND
THIS SESSION OF PARLIAMENT WILL SEE THE INTRODUCTION OF A MUCH
FAIRER AND WIDER SCHEME OF LIMITED TAX DEDUCTIBILITY ON MORTGAGE
INTEREST, WE CONCEDE THAT AUSTRALIA FACES AN AWESOME PROBLEM IN
OVERCOMING OUR ENDEMIC HOUSING CRISIS; BUT THIS GOVERNMENT IS
EVOLVING POLICIES DESIGNED TO TACKLE THE PROBLEM FROM MANY SIDES,
A SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT IS ALREADY OCCURRING IN THE WELFARE
HOUSING FIELD, AND OUR EFFORTS IN THE OTHER SECTORS WILL SOON SHOW
SIMILAR GAINS, kSPITE ALL WE ARE DOING IN THESE AREAS, WE WILL NOT BE
ABLE TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OUR CITIES AND OTHER PROBLEMS AS
EFFECTIVELY AS WE MUST, IF WE DO NOT ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO
ASSUME A GREATER ROLE IN AUSTRALIA, LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE ORGAN OF
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, WHICH KNOWS BEST THEIR
DETAILED NEEDS AND WHICH CAN BE MOST RESPONSIVE TO THOSE NEEDS,
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA FOR TOO LONG HAS BEEN DENIED A PROPER
ROLE, PROPER RESPONSIBILITY AND PROPER FINANCES, IT ALSO PROVIDES
A VIVID DEMONSTRATION OF INEQUALITY IN OUR SOCIETY, LONG-ESTABLISHED
AREAS BENEFIT FROM SERVICES WHICH HAVE BEEN DEVELOPED OVER DECADES,
NEWLY-ESTABLISHED AREAS SUFFER FROM THE FACT THAT LOCAL COUNCILS
CANNOT KEEP UP WITH THE PACE OF DEVELOPMENT IN THE PROVISION OF
ESSENTIAL SERVICES, / 13 
./ 14
-13-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO ENABLE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT TO PLAY A FULL AND PROPER ROLE IN THE AFFAIRS OF OUR
NATION, LAST YEAR WE TOOK A MAJOR STEP IN THIS DIRECTION BY
BRINGING IN THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT. THIS RECONSTITUTES THE
GRANTS COMMISSION TO GIVE IT POWER TO MAKE FUNDS AVAILABLE TO
LOCAL AS WELL AS STATE GOVERNMENTS, THIS RECOGNISES THAT THERE
ARE GREAT DISPARITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT AREAS WITHIN ONE STATE
JUST AS THERE HAVE BEEN DISPARITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT STATES.
THE GRANTS COMMISSION IS NOW ABLE TO PROVIDE FUNDS TO REDUCE THESE
REGIONAL DISPARITIES, IN THE LAST FORTNIGHT IT BEGAN ITS FIRST
HEARINGS UNDER THE NEW ACT. IT HEARD AN APPLICATION FROM COUNCILS
IN REGION 16 OF VICTORIA FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE TO OVERCOME THE
BACKLOG OF SERVICES IN THAT REGION, REGION 16 COVERS SOME OF
THE EASTERN SUBURBS OF MELBOURNEI INCLUDING PART OF THIS ELECTORATE
OF CASEY. THIS WILL BE THE FIRST OF MANY HEARINGS WHICH I TRUST
WILL RESULT IN A PROPER MEASURE OF COMMONWEALTH AID FOR AREAS,
PARTICULARLY NEWLY-DEVELOPED AREAS, WHICH ARE INADEQUATELY
SERVICED AT PRESENT,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TRIED TO PERSUADE THE
STATES TO ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS TO THE LOAN COUNCIL.
THE STATES REFUSED TO AGREE TO THIS PROPOSAL AND SO DEPRIVED, AT
LEAST TEMPORARILY, LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF THE OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE
SURE ACCESS TO ADEQUATE FUNDS, MY GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO ACCEPT
THE ATTITUDE OF THE STATES ON THIS QUESTION AND WE WILL TAKE THIS
MATTER TO THE PEOPLE IN A REFERENDUM TO BE CONDUCTED IN CONJUNCTION
WITH THE SENATE ELECTIONS THIS YEAR, 
-14-
THIS LEADS ME TO THE QUESTION OF THE SENATE. I HAVE
OUTLINED TO YOU TONIGHT THE PRINCIPLES WHICH HAVE GUIDED THE
POLICIES WHICH WE HAVE TRIED TO IMPLEMENT IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS.
IN 1972 WE WON A MANDATE FOR'THOSE POLICIES AND AN ENDORSEMENT OF
THOSE PRINCIPLES. YET CONTINUALLY IN THE LAST 15 MONTHS MEN
WHO WERE ELECTED TO THE SENATE AS LONG AGO AS 1967 AND 1970 HAVE
TRIED TO THWART THOSE POLICIES AND PERVERT THOSE PRINCIPLES.
WHERE IS THEIR MANDATE FOR THE 1970' s? THEY DO NOT HAVE ONE.
YET LOOK AT THE CONSEQUENCES OF THEIR ACTIONS., LAST YEAR
THE SENATE REJECTED 13 BILLS, DEFERRED ANOTHER 10 AND. AMENDED 21.
I HAVE MENTIONED IN PASSING OUR HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, A PROGRAM
DESIGNED TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL PROTECTION AGAINST THE COST OF
ILLNESS FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS,-INCLUDING THE ONE AND A HALF MILLION
PEOPLE WHO HAVE NO SUCH PROTECTION AT PRESENT; A PROGRAM DESIGNED
TO PROVIDE THAT PROTECTION BY THE FAIREST METHOD OF CONTRIBUTION.
THIS WAS. PROBABLY THE MOST THOROUGHLY DISCUSSED POLICY PROPOSED
BY THE LABOR PARTY WHILE IT WAS IN OPPOSITION. ITS POPULAR
ACCEPTANCE PLAYED A LARGE PART IN THE GREAT LIFT IN OUR ELECTORAL
FORTUNES IN 1969 AND THE FULFILMENT OF THOSE FORTUNES IN 1972.
YET THESE MEN, ELECTED AS MUCH AS SIX YEARS AGO, HAVE REJECTED OUR
LEGISLATION FOR THAT PROGRAM; THEY HAVE REJECTED THE PRINCIPLES
OF EQUITY AND UNIVERSALITY WHICH ARE ITS CORNERSTONES. 
IN THE FACE OF OUR MANDATE* THEY HAVE SHELVED THE TRADE
PRACTICES BILL AND, IN SO DOING, THEY LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO
MONOPOLIES AND BIG CORPORATIONS TO FIX PRICES, ORGANISE CARTELS
AND EXPLOIT THE AUSTRALIAN CONSUMER, AGAIN, THEY HAVE DENIED
AUSTRALIANS FAIRNESS, THEY.-HAVE SHELVED THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL AND THUS BLOCKED THE MOST EFFECTIVE'
INSTRUMENT FOR ENSURING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF OUR INDUSTRIES AND
FOR DEVELOPING NEW INDUSTRIES, THEY HAVE LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO
FOREIGN TAKEOVERS AND FOREIGN EXPLOITATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
ECONOMY, THESE SAME MEN HAVE REJECTED THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE
OF EQUAL ELECTORATES, THESE MEN, WHO ARE SO QUICK TO COMPLAIN OF
STRIKES# HAVE BLOCKED ATTEMPTS TO DEMOCRATISE AND MODERNISE THE
TRADE UNION MOVEMENT, THEY HAVE PRESERVED FOR FOREIGN MINING
INTERESTS THE. RIGHT TO EXPLOIT OUR OFF-SHORE RESOURCES, LIKE THE
STATES, THEY HAVE SOUGHT TO DENY TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS
TO NATIONAL REVENUES AND BORROWINGS,
I TRUST THEIR ACTIONS WILL BE REMEMBERED WHEN THE SENATE
ELECTIONS ARE HELD THIS YEAR, I TRUST THAT THE MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS WHO SUPPORTED OUR POLICIES IN 1972 WILL REMEMBER HOW SOME
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT OF THOSE POLICIES HAVE BEEN FRUSTRATED BY A
HOSTILE AND REACTIONARY OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE,
THE VOTERS OF AUSTRALIA GAVE US THE SUPPORT WE NEEDED TO
INITIATE THOSE POLICIES IN 1972. I TRUST THAT IN 1974 THEY WILL
GIVE US THE POWER TO ENSURE THEIR FULL IMPLEMENTATION, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIMIE f1INISTEI E. G. 1HTI C. MP. ,/
FOR THE OPENINHG OF THE SE'HOR ILIAGE LT PROGrAH N~ LOA
GOVERNMENT AT THE CAINUIRRA COLLEGE OF AD CE BJA! U
MO~ D1Y fIC 19/ 1b
IIWELCOME THE INAUGURATION OF THIS IMPORTANT COUr,$'
~* IN THIS IMPORTANT SUBJECT AT THIS IMPORT-ANT INSTITUTTONv
jo IF I HAVE ONE COMPLAINT AGAINST AUSTRALIAN
INSTITUTIONS OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IT IS THIS: THEY HAVE
B3EEN REMARKABLY SLOW TO RECOGNISE THE VALUE OF PRACTICAL.
TRAINING IN GOVERNM1ENT AND PUB3LIC ADMINISTRATION: CAN
., ILLUSTRATE THIS BY RECALLING MY OWN DAY-S AS A STnflENTgC
IN THOSE DAYS, AND INDEED UNTIL QUITE RECENTLY, THERE
WERE PLENTY OF COURSES IN PO. I. TICAL SCIENCE BUT N1O COURSES
p IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT; THERE WERE COURSES IN MEDICIN. E BUT-
/ 9NONE IN. HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION; THERE lWEtE. COURSOiS IN
EDUCATION BUT NONE IN UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION , t THJERE
' i ~ WAS A STRONG TEMPTATION AND I SUSPECT THERE IS~ A TEMPTA1J ON'
NOW -TO REGARD THESE PRACTICAL SUBJECTS* AS THE PROVINCE
AMATEURS*, BENEATH THE DIGNITY OF THE TRUE SCHOLAIR A 1-1D A 11.11I
' OF TIME FOR THE BORN LEADER) C YET TODAY, IF WE. Tf!-K2-THOSE
SAME THREE CONTEMPORARY DISCIPLINES -LOCAL GOVE; lkl: l: ThT,-j
HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION AND UNIVERSITY ADNiINISTRAT ION W
4-df F IND COURSES READILY AVAILABLE IN* UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIAN
Vt, 
i -2-
S1 IT IS A MEA,..; E OF THE IMPORTANCE NOW ACCORDED TO SUCH
STUDIES, A RECOGNITION OF THE GROWING COMPLEXITY AND
SOPHISTICATION OF MODERN GOVERNM1ENT AND SOCIAL ORGANISATION,
THAT WE ARE INAUGURATING THIS SENIOR MANAGEMENT PROGRAM IN
SLOCAL GOVERNMENT AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED
SEDUCATIONX
* TWO WEEKS AGO I SPOKE TO MEMBERS OF THE INSTITUTE
IOF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION IN MELBOURNE AND GAVE AN ACCOU; T
S OF THE GOVERNMENT'S INITIATIVES ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS..
IT STRUCK ME THAT SO MUCH OF MY GOVERNMENT'S HOPES AND
. AMBITIONS FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEPENDED NOT JUST ON WHAT
: GOVERNMENTS CAN DO, BUT ON THE CALIBRE AND EXPERIENCE OF THE
S' MEN AND WOMEN WHO ADMINISTER CITIES, SHIRES AND MUNICIPALITIES
.' FROM DAY TO DAY, IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES
SHOULD BE RUN BY PEOPLE WITH RIGOROUS PRACTICAL TRAINING IN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATIONX THIS IS NO TASK FOR THE
AMATEUR OR THE DILETTANTEX VIE ACCEPT THE IMPORTANCE OF
' SYSTEMATIC STUDIES FOR THE PROFESSIONAL MAN, AND THE
BUSINESSMANX WHY HAS IT TAKEN SO LONG TO RECOGNISE THAT
SUCH TRAINING IS ESSENTIAL FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR IN LOCAL'
" c GOVERNMENT, FOR THE LEADER IN PUBLIC LIFE AS WELL AS FOR THE
SLEADER IN COMMERCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL LIFE?
it
I 
. THIS COURSE IN LOCAL G
: COME AT A MORE OPPORTUNE TIMErt
EVENTFUL ONE PERHAPS A FATEFU
* d IN AUSTRALIAX I DON'T THINK AN
THE EMPHASIS MY GOVERNMENT HAS
GOVERNMENT OR DOUBT THE STRENGT
FIELD) WE WANT TO ELEVATE LOCA
PLACE AS A FULL AND EQUAL PARTN
IT IS NOT SIMPLY A MATTER OF PRI
MORE MONEY IS CERTAINLY NEEDEDX
ARE WITH THE TRUE STATUS OF L
ULTIMATE IMPACT ON OUR LIVESX
NEXT MAY AND THERE SHOULD BE
COMPANY TO EXPLAIN OUR REFERENDI
GOVERNMENT WILL BE EMPOWERED TO
GOVERNMENT BODIES AND TO DISTRI
DEALINGS BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMEI
IN THAT WAY, LOCAL GOVERNMENT W
THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF THE
S AS THE THIRD TIER OF GOVERNMENT
' CONSTITUTION FOR THE FIRST TIME
THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF Ti
SAND MAKE POSSIBLE A RATIONAL CO
, J I p OVERNtENT COULD HARDLY HAVE
THE YEAR AHEAD WILL'BE AN
L ONE FOR LOCAL GOVE-NF! ENT
Y OF YOU WOULD QUARREL WITH
GIVEN TO BETTER LOCAL
H OF OUR RESOLVE IN THIS
L GOVERNMENT TO ITS RIGHTFUL
ER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.
OVIDING. MORE MONEY, THOUGH
WE ARE CONCERNED AS YOU
OCAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS
IF OUR REFERENDUM IS CARRIED
LITTLE NEED FOR ME IN THIS
UM PROPOSALS THE NATIONAL
RAISE MONEY FOR LOCAL
BUTE THAT MONEY IN DIRECT
NT AND THE COMMONWEALTH,
ILL HAVE DIRECT ACCESS TO
NATION-ITS ESSENTIAL-PL ACE
WILL BE ENTRENCHED IN THE
y WE WILL BE ABLE TO -BALANCE
HE THREE DIVISIONS OF
-ORDINATION BETWEEN THE" i,
r i r
r-
SALREADY MY GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN SEVERAL PRACTICAL
STEPS TO PLACE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A MORE SECURE FOOTING,
, ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTIONS LAST YEAR WAS TO WIDEN THE CHARTER
OF THE COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMiISSION TO ENABLE IT TO HEAR
APPLICATIONS FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT REGIONS FOR GRANTS UNDER
" SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION. IN THIS WAY WE HOPE TO MAKE
THE COMMISSION AS EFFECTIVE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
S" REGIONS WITHIN THE STATES AS IT HAS BEEN IN REDUCING
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN THE STATES THEMSELVESt THE FIRST
APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE HAVE BEEN RECEIVED AND HEARINGS
WILL BEGIN SHORTLY OUR SECOND INITIATIVE WAS TO SEEK A VOICE
AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOAN COUNCIL, WE
RAISED THIS PROPOSAL A PROPOSAL CONSISTENT WITH THE POLICY
S, OF THE LABOR PARTY AND OUR MANDATE FROM'THE PEOPLE AT THE
.; CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION LAST SEPTEMBER; AND I REMIND YOU THAT
IT WAS AT THE EXPRESS INSISTENCE OF MY GOVERNMENT THAT
: IR, EPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WERE ADMITTED TO THAT
CONVENTIONX WE RAISED THE PROPOSAL AGAIN AT A SPECIAL
CONFERENCE OF THE PREMIERS IN OCTOBERx THE INABILITY OF THE
PREMIERS TO REACH UNANIMITY ON OUR PROPOSAL OBLIGED US TO
EEK A REFERENDUM A REFERENDUM TO REMOVE ALL CONSTITUTIONAL
OBSTACLES TO THE RATIONAL CO-ORDINATION OF LOCAL, STATE AND
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA, 
IAM FIRU-1LY CONIVIVICED THAT UNLESS THAT REFERENDUIM
IS CARRIED LOCAL COVERNMIET IN AUSTRALIA WILL REMAIN IN ITS
PRESENT SAT-JACK1ET, ITS PRESENT STATE OF PERM'ANENT
FINANCIAL CRISIS, A POOR RELATION OF STATE GOV'ERNMENTS THAT
LACK THE MEANS rO GIVE LOCAL GOVERIHEiNIT THE RESOURCES IT
NEEDS,,, VE CAN GIVE LOCAL GOV/ ERNMENT THE MEANS TO DO ITS JOBA
WE CAN GI\ VE IT THE STATUS AND AUTONOMY IT DESERVES)( WE CAN
ENSURE ITS RIGHTFUL PLACE NOT AS AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATES,
: NOT AS AN APPENDAGE OF THE COMMONWEALTH* BUT AS AN EQUAL
9 PARTNER W1ITH BOTH IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEIf.! NO ONE KNOWS BETTER
THAN YOU PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM, AND ESPECIALLY THE DEDICATED
MEN AND 11OMEN WHO HAVE UNDERTAKEN THIS FIRST COURSE IN LOCAL
GOVERN4MENT AT THIS COLLEGE, THE FRUSTRATIONS AND DIFFICULTI0
OF THE CAREER YOU HAVE CHOSEN~ I BELIEVE THAT IF YOUR CAREERS
Q , ARE TO BE FULLY REWARDING, IF YOUR STUDIES AT THIS COLLEGE
ARE TO BE TRULY MEANINGFUL AND VALUABLE TO YOU AND SOCIETYf
THEN TOGETHER WE MUST WORK FOR A NEW DEAL FOR LOkCAL GOVERNMENT
A-NEW DEAL THAT WILL ENSURE ITS FIRM PLACE It 0NES TI T tiT
AND IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMit
. IHAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE REAL FUTURE OF LOCAL
', GOVERNMENT, ITS REAL SUCCESS, ITS RELEVAN4CE A0D APAPiABILITY,
ITS POPULARITY, ITS ABILITY TO INVOLVE CITIZENS AND * fO ENGAGE
:;-THEIR EFFORTS AND SYMPATHIES, WILL DEPEND LARGELY ON 711E
PEOPLE WHO ADMINIISTER LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A DAILY BASIS, 0
:. L~ OCAL. GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED DIRECTLY-WITH OUR LIV
,' OHREELSE DO WE FIND SUCH INTIMATE L114KS BETWEEN GG VERN,' IENZtJ
Y~ ANPT~ GOVERm0,1(' IN NO OTHER AREA OF GOVERNMET RETHR
$,( CH. EA DIEI HE'iSERVCS ROIDED AiD 
-6-
', THE RESOURCES AVAILABLE * ro PAY FOR THOSE SERVTcc-s THE
* RESULTING DEMANDS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ADMI1NISTPATORSR
ON THEIR SK( ILLS, THEIR EXPERIENCE, THEIR INGENUITY -WL
. INCREASE AS RAPIDLY AS THE DEMAN4DS ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ITSELFPt
THAT IS WHY I WELCOME THE I14ITIATIVE FOR THIS COURSE
. AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCAT 1ONf I SHOULD
EMPHASISE THAT IT IS NOT AN " ACCREDITATION COURSE" FOR LOCAL
V GOVERNMENT OFFICERS SUCH AS THE MITCHtELL COLLEGE OF ADVANCED
L7~' EUCATION PROVIDES IN NEW SOUTI*: ALES OR THE ROYAL MELBAJURNE
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. IN VICTORIA;! IT IS IN NO SENSE
ATTEMPT TO MUSCLE IN ON COURSES THAT STATE INSTIION ARE
. ALREADY PROVIDINGX IN FACT IT'IS A MODEL OF THE NlAY THAT
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS CAN AND SHOULD BE ORGAf,' MEDX
~ NATIONAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORGAN! SATIONS HAVE ALL
0HAD A PART TO PLAY IN ARRANGING THIS COURSEr, [ HE FIRST
SINITIATIVE CAME FROM THE INSTITUTE OF felUNICIPAL Anm~ INISTRATiON
I1N7 O~ IT BEGAN LOOKING FOR A TERTIARY INTI17IN1Oi~ 3I
COUSESIN LOCAL GOVERNMENT;? THE RESPONSE CA'E FROM THIS
COLLEGE -A BODY FUNDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GoVERNMENTA(~ oz
IN ORDER TO PLAN AND ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM, AN ADVISORY
COUNCIL. HAS BEEN FORMED REPRESENTING NATIONAL, STATE A.-11 LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AND ALL OTHER ORGAHlISATIOI NjS CONCERtNELi~ ' THE 1N2v TTtJTI
OF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION, THE AUSTRALIAN COU; I4C1L of-Lo2AL'
GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS; LOCAL GOVERNIMENT ENGINEERS, HEALTH
41 ' , SURVEYORS, PRIVATE BUSINESSMEN, STATE L. OCAL. GOVEPFNhIENT
DEPARTMENTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REG-IONAL DEV:.-71OPMEN'r,
HE DEPARTMENTS OF THE CAPITAL TERRITORY AND THE NORTHERN
. TALA R
TRR I THE AuSTALA INTTTE OF URBAN STUDIES -ALL ARE:
Fni W. AIT) 
IDOUB3T IF A 14ORE COMPREHENSIVE ASSEMBLY OF STATE, L-OCAL
AND NATIONAL AGlENiCIES HAS BEEN BPoU'orit TOGETHER FOR A SINGLEl:
PURPOSE INJ SUCH A READY SPIRIT OF CO-0OP
ICONGR~ ATULATE ALL THOSE' 1 HO HAVE ORGANISED THIS
COURSE, BUT TI] ERE ARE TWO MEN I14 PARTICULAR WHO DESERVE
OUR GH-ATITUDE) THE PROGRAM OWIES MUCH TO THE INITIATI VE
OF IMR, ANDREW IIIALLS, A FORMER To! V~ CLERK OF BOX HILL AND
NOW4 A MEMBER OF THE-GRANTS CoNNrISSloN; AND Milh. 1GMi' '. IO) RSLEY,
CONVENOR OF TH'-E COMMITTEE ESTAflLISHIED BY THlE INSTITUTE OF
MIUNICIPAL ADI-1IINISTRATI'ON IN 19/ 0 TO EXPLORE THE POSSIBILITY
OF AN INSTITUTE OF LOCAL GOVERMlENT STUDIES-,, YOU ARE
FORTUNATE ALSO IN HAVING THE SUP PORT AND COLLABOR~ ATI OF
* THE INSTITUTE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT STUDIES IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF BI RM ItJ M YOOUR INITIAL PLANS ARE FOR TWO OUSS
YEAR WITH 25 PL. ACES IN EACiqf. TiiERE ARE, MN FACT, 2/ PEOPLE.
PARTICIPATING IN THE FIRST COUjRSE., THAT IS A MOST CRAT IFY 11*.
* RESPONSEje
' I.
2
4 iC ' 4.
E
4 
-8-
I AM GLAD TO ANNOUNCE THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN
AND REGIONAL DEVELOP1MENT, FROM NEXT YEAR, WILL BE CONTRIBUTING
$ 12,000 A YEAR IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE COURSE4 THE COLLEGE
HAS ACCEPTED THE DEPARTMENT'S SUGGESTION THAT, DEPENDING
ON THE NEEDS OF THE COLLEGE, PRIORITY WILL BE GIVEN TO
USING THE MONEY TO ENSURE AN ADEQUATE REPRESENTATION AT
COURSES BY OFFICERS FROM SMALLER AREAS; A GENERAL REDUCTION
IN THE COST OF THE COURSE WHERE PRACTICAL; AND PROVISION
OF FUNDS FOR VISITING LECTURERS OR RESEARCH ACTIVITIESX
ANY FUNDS ALLOCATED BY THE COLLEGE FOR . SCHOLARSHIP ATTENDANCE'
CERTAINLY YOU CAN RELY ON MY GOVERNMENT'S ACTIVE
E NCOURAGEMENT AND PRACTICAL SUPPORTt BUT WHAT I FIND TRULY
HEARTENING IS THAT THE INITIATIVE FOR THIS COURSE CAME FROM
LOCAL-GOVERNMENT ITSELF,, IT IS SYMBOLIC, PERHAPS, OF
NGATTHIOEN AL IMPORTANCE WE ATTACH TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT THAT
r: THE COURSE SHOULD BE PROVIDED HERE, IN THE NATIONAL CAPITALIT
SEEMS TO ME THAT COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION ARE
UNIQUELY EQUIPPED, WITH THEIR MORE FEEXIBLE PROGRAMMING
ORRANTGOE MPERNOTVSID, E COURSES IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
E AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS NOW ASSUMED TOTAL FUNDING
RESPONSIBILITIES'FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, INCLUDING
POLYTECHNICSt THE GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION
IN THE 1973/ 75 TRIENNIUM IS MORE THAN $ 600 MILLIONg
SI / 8A 
4-8 WE I3ELIFVE THE COL. LEGES CAN WIDFll THE RA ' Y E OF
TERTIARY EDUCATION OPPORTUITIES1 " I ITH A STRONG
BIAS TOWARDS THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE
STUDIES UNDERTAKEN~ IN THE INTRODUCTION OF N EW
COURSES -OF WHICH THIS COURSE IS A GOOD E) XAMPLE-
' THE COLLEGES ANID STATE AND NATIONAL GOVERfl" 1F NT
-AUTHORITIES HAVE PLACED PROPER I~ PHASIS ON KNOWN
INDUISTRIAL AND SOCIAL NEEDS-I HOPE THAT THERE
1 11111 SOON BE COURSES AVAILABLE, NOT ONLY IN
UTI VR1fENTO EArN~ DE TA DMIINISTRATION
AT ALL LEVELSgt 
~ 71
~ j.
I. S..
1~ I' 12 I ii I? a .91-I, YOUR O11' 11 EXPERIENCE IN PUBLIC LIFE, NO LESS THAN
MINE, HAS SHOWN HOW INCREASINGLY COMPLEX, SOPHISTICATED
AND DIFFICULT THE PRACTICE OF GO\' ER[ IMET HAS BECOM1E IN MODERN
TIMESy, IN THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THIS COURSE WILL DO MUCH TO
REDUCE THOSE COMPLEXITIES AND REf--OVE THOSE DIFFICULTIES, IN
THE KNOWLEDGE THAT YOUR STUDIES WILL MAKE FOR MORE EXPERT
AND EFFICIENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR OUR PEOPLE, I HAVE GREAT
PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THIS FIRST SENAOR M1ANAGEMENT PROGRANl
IN LOCAL GOVEN MIENT AT THE CANBERRA COLLEGE CF ADVAN4CED
EDUCATIONA
77' 



HN EWS RELEASIE
NQ DATE 6 March 1974
AUSTRAILIA AND ASI A : THE CHALLENGE OF EDUCATION
The following is the text of a speech by the
Prime Minister, The Hon. E. G. Whitlam, MV. P., to the
Asian Seminar during the Centenary Celebrations of the
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Tuesday 5 March, 1974:
" There is something profoundly satisfying, and
essentially contemporary in spirit, in the decision to hold an
Asian Seminar in conjunction with the centenary of this great
University. I can think of no more fitting demonstration of the
reality of your involvement, and Australia's involvement, in the
welfare of the countries of our region.
The origins of this University, like those of this
State, are of course rooted deeply in European culture and, more
particularly, in the customs and traditions of the great English
foundations of scholarship and learning. For that reason, yo-a'
emphasis on Asian education and culture, and Australia's links
with Asia, is striking proof of a modern and progressive interest
in our neighbours. For myself it is especially gratifying that
your seminar reflects two deep personal commitments of my own:
my commitment to education and my commitment to the progress and
development of our region.
During my recent visit to South-East Asia my aim was
to advance Australia's national interests in a region of
continuing and increasing importance to this country. I believe
I succeeded. I believe the confluence of history and geographyour
mainly European origins and our location on the edge of
South-East Asia affords us a unique opportunity to demonstrate
that countries with quite different ethnic, cultural and
religious backgrounds can evolve intimate and lasting relationships.
We have moved closer to Asia; we are involved in Asia 
2.
as never before. And we are particularly involved in the
education of Asian people. We provide funds for the expansion
of the teaching of Asian languages and cultures in Australia.
We provide travel grants to enable Australian teachers to visit
Asia. A month ago my colleague the Minister for Education went
to Bangkok to accept, on behalf of Australia, an invitation to
join SEAMEC, the South-East Asian Ministers of Education
Conference. Naturally our interest in the region extends beyond
cultural and educational matters, important as these are. We
give substantial economic aid to Asian development. I have
therefore chosen this occasion to announce that the Australian
Government will contribute $ 18,150,000 to the Asian Development
Fund. As many of you know, the Fund has been established within
the Asian Development Bank, and my colleague the Treasurer, in
his capacity as Governor of the Bank, was among those who
supported the creation of the Development Fund. Historians will
note, I trust, that Australia is one of the first countries to
announce its contribution. The beneficiaries of the Fund will
be the poorer developing member countries of the Asian and Pacific
region. There are many who suggest that the chief emphasis of
Government has been to promote a " new nationalism" in Australia.
It would, I think, be better and more accurate to describe our
policy as a new internationalism.
My principal purpose this morning is to tell you
something of Australia's contribution to Asian education,
particularly through the Colombo Plan.' In this room today there
is living, brilliant evidence of the success of that Plan and 4
of the contribution this university has made to its ideals and
objectives. I note,' among t he other participa nts of your
seminar, the Honourable Datuk Taib, Minister of Primary Industries
in Malaysia, a distinguished member of the South Australian bar
and a graduate of this university. I welcome Mr W. R. Crocker,
Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia, a former Australian
diplomat of great eminence and, again, a graduate of Adelaide
University. I pay tribute to Sir Percy Spender, former
President of the International Court of Justice, who, as a
Minister of the Australian Government, did much to develop and
-encourage the Colombo Plan in its early years. 
3.
Indeed,-looking at your list of speakers and chairman
both Asians and Australians I cannot recall a more distinguished
and representative assembly of men whose whole lives and careers
have been devoted to the cultural and educational advancement of
the Asian people. I welcome you all, and wish your seminar the
utmost success. The Australian Government attaches great importance to
its overseas aid activities. We regard the technical assistance and
training elements of that aid as most significant. We are now
establishing a new organisation, the Development Assistance Agency,
to administer all our aid programs, whether bilateral or
multilateral. We want to ensure that an innovative and imaginative
approach is adopted to foreign aid and to see that our aid programs
are quickly and effectively put into action. Our objective is not
only to increase the volume of Australian aid, but to improve the
quality of the assistance we are able to provide; to ensure that
it has a more direct bearing upon improving the quality of life in
developing countries.
Put simply, our aid is oriented to the needs of fellow
human beings. The training and education elements of aid programs
are the most direct means by which we can attain this orientation.
By building upon human skills and knowledge, we help to develop th-a
one essential, self-regenerating resource upon which social and
economic progress ultimately depends. Training and education
programs have properly been in the forefront since our official
overseas aid programs began in' 195l with the commencement of the
Colombo Plan. Australian assistance to education under the Colombo Plan
has been directed over the years into a range of activities designed
to meet various needs of the recipient countries. At present our
assistance covers training in Australian universities, Government
departments, educational institutions and industry; the sending of
experts and advisers to the developing countries to assist in
research, training and development; and the provision of equipment
for educational institutions in the developing countries themselves.
The number of awards financed each year under Australian
Government aid schemes for training and education in Australia has 
4.
grown impressively; from 450 in 1955 to 3,345 in 1973. In money
terms, annual expeinditure on education and training under the
Colombo Plan has increased in the last five years from $ 3.7 million
to $ 6.4 million. To this should be added substantial sums for
assisting educational institutions abroad. These figures can be
expected to grow, in keeping with the general growth of our aid
programs.. You will recall that the Government last year accepted
the United Nations target to raise its official development
assistance to 0.7 per cent of GNP by the end of the decade.
Perhaps I should point out that the Colombo Plan techniques
of providing training and technical assistance now extend beyond the
Colombo Plan area being covered by various programs of assistance to
countries in Africa and the South Pacific, including Papau New
Guinea. My-commaents today can be generally taken to include these
other programs.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING IN AUSTRALIA
Overseas students have made up a significant percentage of
full-time enrolments in Australian universities. In 1972 3492
overseas students from Asian, African and Pacific countries were
enrolled at universities. This represented 4.2 per cent of a total
full-time enrolment of 83,600. Australian Government-sponsored
overseas students enrolled at universities totalled 1,383 or 1.7
per cent of the full-time university enrolment.
Each year recipient Governments are invited to nominate
students for training in Australia. Levels and fields of study
are determined by the governments of the recipient country depending
. upon their own varying national needs. The only limitations imposed
by the Australian Government are concerned with the relevance of
the proposed training to the economic development of the nominating
country, the availability of the proposed training in the nominating
country, the adequacy of the qualifications of the nominee to
undertake the proposed training and the capacity of Australian
institutions to provide it. Members of the Colombo Plan have
agreed among themselves that training at technician level and below
should be provided only for highly specialised instruction for which
adequate facilities are unavailable within their own or neighbouring
countries. 
.4
Malaysia has been the largest recipient of Australian
Colombo Plan scholarships and fellowships, with some 2,300 awards
up to the end of last year. Then follows Indonesia, also with over
2,000 awards; India 1,300 and Thailand 1,200. Numbers however do
not tell the whole story, and the impact of Australian studies may
be relatively greater in some of the smaller recipient countries
than in the larger ones. The 56 Australian-trained students in the
Maldive Islands, or the 30 Bhutanese, contribute significantly
to the pooi of skills available in those countries, whereas our
much greater contribution to a country like India must remain
largely unseen. In all, over 13,000 Colombo Plan students and
trainees have trained in Australia since the commencement of the
Colombo Plan. Scholarships and fellowships have been provided for
secondary and undergraduate courses, post-graduate studies and
for academic work in research institutions. In the early days of
the Colombo Plan a high percentage of awards was taken up for these
formal courses. One interesting development, reflecting the
changing needs and priorities of the developing countries, is the
current trend towards short intensive courses outside the formal
educational institutions.
In 1972/ 73, the universities and technical colleges
accounted for only 31 per cent of the new intake of sponsored
students with 69 per cent undertaking non-formal types of training.
This was almost the exact opposite of the respective percentages
applying only five years earlier. I expect that this trend will
continue as the educational institutions within the developing
countries become more and more able to cope with their own needs,
particularly at the undergraduate and secondary schools level.
The practical courses of training to which I have just
referred are designed to meet the needs of individual students
and groups of students, and consequently follow varied patterns.
Training may consist of practical attachments in Government
departments and industry; international training courses in a
wide range of fields, mainly concerned with agriculture and food
production, administration and management, and professional and
scientific subjects; courses in the English language; and awards 
6.
to train people to manage and control projects being set up in their
homelands by Australia. Another means of help has been assistance
to Australian universities to establish courses especially designed
. to meet the needs of the developing countries, such as the
Agricultural Development Economics course at the Australian
National University.
Australian academics and universities have themselves made
a direct and valuable contribution to Australia's role in international
education, not only through their contributions to the
formulation of Aid policies, but also by direct participation in
the business of aid. The Australian-Asian Universities Co-operation
Scheme, administered through the Australian Vice-Chancellors'
Committee, provides for a direct association between Australian
universities and universities in Indonesia, Malaysia arnd Singapore.
To avoid the dissipation of resources the area of activities has
initially been confined to disciplines related to agriculture and
food production, with the future intention of extending into
population studies. The Scheme is financed from our aid funds.
I should now like to mention Australian assistance to
educational institutions in developing countries themselves, a
somewhat less well known feature of Australian aid than the training
provided in Australia.
Under the Colombo Plan we have already provided experts and
equipment to a number of countries. For instance, in Indonesia,
Australia is providing adv ice to the Ministry of Education and
Culture on the planning of vocational training programs and the
training of technical teachers and administrators. Experts have
been sent to the Jogjakarta Vocational Training Institute to advise
on curriculum and teacher training.
In Singapore, we are providing equipment and advice for
instruction and curriculum planning at the Jurong Vocational
Institute, and lecturers and examiners for medical degree
examinations at the University of Singapore. In Malaysia,
Australia has recently equipped a number of woodwork schools.
. In Thailand, we have provided lecturers for the Language
Institute, the North Bangkok Engineering School, and equipment for
the Mahidol University and the Bangkok Technical Institute. 
is*~ 7.
In Korea, we have been assisting with instructors and
equipment at a major Technical School for a number of years, at a
cost of over half a million dollars. In laos, we have provided
supplies for primary schools and are building a Forestry School,
as well as providing instructors for the Vientiane Teachers'
Training College. I consider initiatives such as these serve a good purpose
and, as I shall mention later, this is an area to which we should
divert increasing attention.
Another area for development is that of " third country"
awards, whereby Australia provides fellowships for students from a
developing country to study in another country in the Colombo Plan
region. Until recently, the number of awards of this type was very
small, but such training offers distinct advantages. We should
encourage it wherever appropriate. I have in mind educational
institutions such as the Regional English Language Centre in
Singapore, the Civil Aviation Training Centre, the Asian Institute
of Technology in Bangkok and the International Rice Research
Institute in Manila.
I know the overriding question in many minds is whether
our aid programs are working. Various studies of the results of our
educational programs have been made. These have not been
co-ordinated, nor are they by any means comprehensive; but they
have contributed to our knowledge and appreciation of the problems
involved. I have in mind the studies made by various research
scholars on the utilisation of Australian skills within the countries
of South and South-East Asia; the effects of their Australian
experience upon students' attitudes to their homelands, their
employment on their return and the problems of communication
experienced by the foreign student abroad.
Within the Government the Department of Foreign Affairs
has conducted for many years a follow-up evaluation covering
returned students. On the initiative of Australia, the Colombo
Plan Council for Technical Co-operation has now adopted a standard
form of evaluation questionnaire directed to the recipient
governments, to obtain their assessment of the results of training.
abroad. The Departments of Foreign Affairs, Immigration and 
Education have also been collaborating for the last two years with
* the Australian-National University in a study undertaken as a part
of a worldwide examination by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research ( UNITAR) of the effects of study abroad upon
the attitudes of foreign students, in relation to the problem of
the so-called " brain drain".
These studies are a necessary part of the process of review
and assessment. Inevitably, the 23 years of Colombo Plan activity
are not an unrelieved history of success. Aspects of the programs
have come in for criticism and it would be surprising if this were
not so.* Looking at our total educational assistance, both through
the Colombo Plan and. to private students, I have been concerned to
see an ethnic and economic imbalance. Our educational aid has gone
overwhelmingly to people of the Chinese race. Much as I respect and
admire such people, we have tended to help those whose economic
circumstances in many cases would have allowed them to help
themselves. A poor student is unlikely to be able to take advantage
of cdur educational opportunities no matter how brilliant
scholastically unless he succeeds in gaining his own Government's
Inomination for a Colombo Plan Scholarship. At the same time we have
been reluctant to apply a means test to the citizens of other
countries seeking to enter Australia for education, nor to apply
other discriminatory measures.
In considering how best to ensure that benefits are more
equally open to other ethnic groups and to those in greatest need,
I believe we should be providing greater assistance than at present
for the development of educational institutions in the developing
countries themselves. I recognise that there are difficulties.
The supply of teachers and lecturers able to undertake assignments*
abroad is not unlimited, The demands for staff arising from the
Government's educational policies within Australia cannot yet be
fully assessed. There are problems in the adaptation of Australian
teachers and lecturers to the curricula and methods of other
educational systems, to an alien cultural background, and often to
a foreign language. However these are problems which I believe
can be overcome with effective planning. I would see such expanded
progress abroad as complementing continuing programs in Australia. 
I also see value in extending the present system of Third
Country fellowships for regional education and training institutions.
We can provide training teams to conduct short courses within the
developing countries in fields of study where this type of assistance
can be effectively introduced. We will expand joint training courses
already offered in collaboration with the Government of New Zealand
and will investigate the possibilities of joint arrangements for
training abroad with international organisations such as the
World Bank. The Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Aid drew
attention to the need to direct our assistance away from the heavy
preponderance of private students pursuing undergraduate studies
in Australia. As I have explained earlier, this readjustment has
already occurred in the Colombo Plan. Within an officially
sponsored aid program, worked out between Governments, the level
of studies can be readily adjusted to the specific needs of each
country, at its particular stage of development.
It is far more difficult, however, to influence the
aspirations of private citizens in other countries whose sights are
set upon an academic career. As I found during my visit to Thailand,
the tradition of study abroad is well established. The Thai
Government and individual citizens attach great importance to the
opportunities we have offered to their young students and we must
take due account of their views.
-I turn now to the question of the return of students to
their homeland after their studies. The objectives of our sponsored
programs -the transfer of knowledge and training to the developing
countries -would be defeated if the skills acquired abroad were not
taken home by the student. This has been a matter to which Australia
and its Colombo Plan partners have always attached considerable
importance. Indeed it was on the Australian initiative that it was
made the subject of special study by the Colombo Plan Consultative
Committee in 1972. To limit a " brain drain", the Colombo Plan
Council for Technical Co-operation, which represents all donor and
all recipient governments, requires that every trainee under the
Colombo Plan shall return home on the completion of his training.
In addition, most home governments impose a money bond or a bond
of service on their trainees to encourage their return or compensate 
for the loss of their skills. This is a contract between the
recipient government and its own citizens in which the donor
government is not directly involved.
The same general arrangements apply in Australia to trainees
under other schemes for sponsored training, which extend the
Colombo Plan principle to other areas of the world.
Given these arr-angements the return of sponsored stude-nts
has not proved to be a problem. Less than 2 per cent of the total1
number of sponsored students remain in Australia, in most instances
because of the thoroughly laudable reason that they have married
Australians. Private students are in a different position. There are
at the moment approximately 10,000 private overseas students in
Australia and there have been about 40,000 in the period since 1950,
They are quite distinct from sponsored students, They have no
official backing from their own governments; they are enrolled by
direct personal application to Australian institutions; they
provide their own financ-ia. resources to travel to Australia and t,-o
maintain and educate themselves. Nevertheless, government subsidies
-to educational. institutions in respect of places occupied by private
ovecse: s students amoun-ted to about $ 9.5 million in 1972. My
Government's abolition of tertiary fees will considerably increase
indirect assistance to private students of this kind.
Private students have been coming to Australia since the
beginning of the century. The first arrangements for student entry
were made in 1904. Over the years many thousands of private Asian
students have studied in Australia and returned home to help in
the development of their countries.
Until 1973 the private overseas students program was
considered an adjunct to aid to developing countries. My
Government's objectives in reviewing the admission of private students
has been to place emphasis on good relations and cultural exchange.
Under our new policy private students continue to enter Australia on
a temporary basis; but if successful private students wish to remain
in Australia and can meet the normal migration criteria, the
Australian Government will no longer compel them to depart. As in
the past, I expect that most private students will continue to see 
their future in their own homelands. We have been inclined to
exaggerate -the attractions of Australia to the young people of other
countries. The ties of family and friends, their obligations to
their fellow countrymen and their own natural attachment to the land
of their birth will draw most of the students home when their studies
are completed. Some will wish to remain, including some whose skills
are also needed in their own countries.
In my recent Asian tour some coiuntries, notably Singapore,
expressed concern at the contributory effect this policy would have
on the " brain drain" and the loss of skilled personnel. I consider
the onus most properly lie on the home country to impose the
limitations and barriers or conditions that it considers necessary.
It must also bear the odium or responsibility of requiring its
students to return. I have agreed with the Prime Minister of
Singapore that in future all Singapore private students should be
officially sponsored by the Government of Singapore to ensure their
return to Singapore at the conclusion of their studies. There could
be cases where humanitarian considerations might require a depar-ture
from this principle. Mr Lee agreed that this could be so.
In looking at the results achieved by the Colombo Plan
in thp educational area, we have to remember that we are not
dealing only with statistics but with human beings. Not that the
statistics are unimpressi-ve. More than 13,000 sponsored students
have passed through the scheme up to the end of 1973. Sponsored
overseas students' results at the annual examinations of Australian
universities have been very satisfactory, with a pass rate of over
per cent in 1972 ( the last year for which figures are available).
That is a tribute to the care with which they were selected, their
personal efforts, and the assistance they received from their tutors
and mentors here. But impressive and important as these figures
are, they are less significant than the contributions that these
students have made to the economic and social development of their
countries and the effects that they have had upon our relationships
Viith their own governments and peoples.
We have trained under the Colombo Plan 1,800 engineers,
2,500 educationists, 900 agriculturalists, 900 medical and health 
workers, 550 nurses, and over 1, C00 public administrators. I can
list for you Members of Parliament, Governors of Provinces, Heads
of Departments, senior scientists, professors, and a host of senior
and middle administrators in Asian countries who have received their
education and training with us in Australia. These are facts. They
are a record of important achievement. But they are not the full
story. An equally important, less easily defined, achievement is
the growth of bonds between Australia and the developing countries,
a heightened level of understanding between us, and perhaps most
gratifying of all, a withering away of xenophobia, isolationism and
racism in Australia. I have no doubt that your seminar will make
its own important contribution to these great objectives of
enlightenment, tolerance and understanding."
r~ 12. 



SPEECHI BY THE PRI IE MINISTER, [ iR. E. G. WIPITLA:!,
AT THE OPENING OF THE KAISER STUHL ' IIERY CIATEAU, ' URIOPTA
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, FRIflAY 9 11ARCi 1974
JNE OF THE MOST NOTICEABLE CHANGES IN AUSTRALIAN
LIVING IN THE LAST DECADE OR SO HAS 3EEN THE GREAT AND
GROWING POPULARITY OF WINE. IT HAS COME HAND-IN-HAND
WITH A TRANSFORMATION OF OUR EATING HABITS. ARE NO
LONGER A NATION OF PEOPLE WHO EAT STEAK, EGGS AND CHIPS,
WASHED DOWN WITH BEER. MANY AUSTRALIANS ARE NOW AS
LIKELY TO BE FOUND EATING VEAL MARSALA, ACCOMPANIED BY
A RIESLING, OR BOEUF AU POIVRE WITH A BOTTLE OF CABERNET
SHIRAZ. IT IS ONE OF THE SMALL DISADVANTAGES OF MY
DUTIES THAT I AM NOT ABLE TO SHARE THE FULL FRUITS OF
THIS TRANSFORMATION, A SYBARITIC LIFE, IT SEEMS, IS NOT
POSSIBLE FOR THOSE IN HIGH OFFICE.
IT IS FITTING IN THE IAROSSA VALLEY TO PAY TRIBUTE
TO THE TWO QUITE DISTINCT GENERATIONS OF NEW SETTLERS WHO
HAVE PLAYED SUCH AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THIS DEVELOPMENT.
GERMAN REFUGEES ESCAPING FROM RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION
FOUNDED THE FIRST PROFITABLE WINERIES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
AND THEIR DESCENDENTS HAVE CONTINUED AND EXPANDED THEIR
ACTIVITIES SINCE THEN. THE NAME KAISER STUHliL ALONE
SYMBOLISES THE EFFORTS OF THE MIGRANTS FROM PRUSSIA AND
SILESIA WHO WERE THE FIRST SETTLERS IN THIS VALLEY IN 1842. 
IT WAS A LATER GENERATION OF MIGRANTS WHO DID SO MUCH
TO MAKE AUSTRALIANS APPRECIATE THEIR OWN WINES.
SOME OF THOSE MIGRANTS, TOO, WERE ESCAPING RELIGIOUS
PERSECUTION INDEED, THE MOST FEARSOME PERSECUTION THE
WORLD HAS EVER SEEN, OTHERS WERE SEEKING A NEW LIFE
AFTER THE RAVAGES OF WORLD WAR I. THEY BROUGHT WITH
THEM A NEW AND DIVERSE STYLE OF LIVING WHICH HAS CHANGED
IRREVOCAIBLY THE HABITS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.
THIE CURRENT SOOM IN WINE, W,-IHICH IS ONE OF THE
BENEFITS OF THE INFLUENCE OF THESE TWO SEPARATE
GENERATIONS, FOLLOWS A LONG PUT UNCERTAIN HISTORY FOR
THE INDUSTRY. THE FIRST FEEBLE VINEYARD IN AUSTRALIA
WAS PLANTED BY CAPTAIN ARTHUR PHILLIP SOON AFTER THE
ARRIVAL OF THE FIRST FLEET IN 1788, IT WAS NOT UNTIL
YEARS AFTER THIS INITIAL FAILURE THAT GREGORY PLAXLAND
PRODUCED A VINTAGE AND SHIPPED A 30 GALLON CASK OF h4INE
TO LONDON. IN THE ENSUING FEW YEARS WINE MAKING WAS
CARRIED ON BY OTHER SETTLERS. ONE WRITER HAS, HOWEVER,
REMARKED THAT IN THOSE VERY EARLY DAYS VITICULTURE AND
WINE MAKING 1WERE EXCLUSIVELY THE HOBBY OF LANDED,
EDUCATED ENGLISH COLONISTS WHO HAD ACQUIRED A TASTE FOR
WINE OF THE CONTINENTAL STYLES':, :' PRODABLY THE WINE THEY
MADE WAS POOR STUFF,' THE WRITER HAS REMARKED RATHER
GRUFFLY, NEVERTHELESS, THE INDUSTRY GRADUALLY SPREAD
IN NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, 
Tin LSTH CENTURY HAD NOT ENDED, HOW'. EVER, BEFORE
THE INDUJSTRYI STRUCK PRODLEMS. ITS REPUTATION SUJFFERED
GREAT DAMAGE BECAUSE OF THE BOOM IN CHEAP, FORTIFIED WINES
ON THE GOLD DIGGINGS. THEN THE WINE DISEASE, PHYLLOXERA
VASTATRIX, SPREAD THROUGHOUJT VICTORIA AND PARTS OF NEW
SOUTH WALES. LIE SECOND PROBLEM WAS SOLVED. THE FIRST
CONTINUED, IN DIFFERENT FORMS, FOR SOME TIME. TIE LACK
OF PROPER EXPORT QUJALITY CONTROLS AND ' BAD BLENDING WITH
INFERIOR WINE FROM OTHER PARTS OF THE THEN EMPIRE GREATLY
HARMED THE REPUTATION OF AUSTRALIAN WINE. IRONICALLY, IT
WAS THlE SECOND WORLD WAR NHICH GAVE NEW nEART TO OUR
WINEMAKERS. THE SHORTAGE OF OTHER LIQUOR LED TO AN
ALMOST THREE-FOLD INCREASE IN THE DOMESTIC CONSUMPTION
OF WINE. THE REAL BREAKTHROUGH, HOWEVER, CAME IN THE
1950S AND 1960lS. A. T LONG LAST AUSTRALIAN WINES WERE
ACCEPTED BY A GROW1ING NUM' 3ER OF AUSTRALIANS FOR THEIR TRUE
WORTH. AUSTRALIANS ARE NOW DRINKING MORE THAN TWO GALLONS
OF WINE PER HEAD EVERY YEAR, THE INDUSTRY HAS BEEN OF
PARTICULAR IMPORTANCE TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA. MORE THAN
TWO-THIRDS OF ALL AUSTRALIAN WINE IS GROWN IN THIS STATE
AND THIS HAS BEEN A SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN THE ECONOMY OF
A NUJMBER OF REGIONS, SUCH AS THIS AREA.
-j-
WHILE THE INDUSTRY IS GENERALLY BUOYANT AT PRESENT,
THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT SOME PROBLEMS DO EXIST.
A TARIFF B3OARD REPORT ON BRANDY IN AUGUST LAST YEAR DREW
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEM OF THE OVER-SUPPLY OF BRANDY,
TO WHICH MANY GROWERS LOOK AS A MEANS OF USING SURPLUS
GRAPES. THE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR WRIEDT,
AND THE MINISTER FOR SECONDARY INDUSTRY, MR. ENDERBY, HAVE
ESTABLISHED A BODY TO REPORT TO THEM ON THE MEANS OF
ABSORBING GRAPE SURPLUSES ARISING E2EFORE ANY LONGER TERM
RESTRUCTURING OR ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS CAN BE IMPLEMENTED.
WE EXPECT TO BE ABLE TO CONSIDER THIS REPORT VERY SOON.
IN DEALING WITH THOSE AND ANY OTHER PROBLEMS WHICH MIGHT
EXIST IN THE INDUSTRY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE GUIDED BY
THE PRINCV'-LE IT WISHES TO APPLY TO ALL PRIMARY INDUSTRIES:
THAT THEY BE SELF-SUJFFICIENT, PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT.
AGAINST THE GENERAL BACKGROUND WHICH I HAVE DESCRIBED,
THE BAROSSA CO-OPERATIVE WINERY LIMITED HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
SUCCESS STORIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN WINE INDUSTRY. IT CAME
INTO BEING IN 1931 WNHEN THE GROWERS IN THE VALLEY POOLED
THEIR RESOURCES TO MAKE W INE DURING THE DEPRESSION. SINCE
1953, WHEN THE KAISER STIJllL LABEL NAMED AFTER THE FLAT--
TOPPED HILL OVERLOOKING THE BAROSSA V! ALLEY WAS FIRST
USED, THE CO-OPERATIVE HAS PURSUED A VIGOROUS MARKETING
POLICY. IN ADDITION TO QUALITY BOTTLES OF WINE, IT HAS
SUCCESSFULLY MARKETED FLAGON AND OTHER POPULAR WINES. 
ONE OF ITS MOST ENCOURAGING ENDEAVOURS HAS BEEN IN
THE FIELD OF EXPORTS, LIE CO-OPERATIVE HAS A FULLTIME
EXPORT MARKETING DIRECTOR AND IS, I UNDERSTAND, NOW THE
LEADING EXPORTER OF AUSTRALIAN WIPES TO THE UNITED STATES
AND JAPAN, ITS WINES ' 30 TO MORE THAN 20 OVERSEAS MARKETS.
~ JUSTIFIABLY IT WAS ANARDED A NATIONAL EXPORT A\ WARD FOR
OUTSTANDING EXPORT ACHIEVEMENT IN 1973. 1 HOPE THAT ITS
WORK IN THIS FIELD IS TAKEN AS A LEAD BY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
WINEMAKERS. CERTAINLY THE AUJSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY
INDUSTRY AND TUlE DEPARTMENT OF OVERSEAS TRADE STAND READY
TO ASSIST IN ANY W~ ORTHWHILE ATTEMPTS TO EXPAND OUR OVERSEAS
MARKETS. ON A PERSONAL NOTE, I AM ALSO DELIGHTED AT ANOTHER
INNOVATION OF THE CO-OPERATIVE. YOU HAVE INVITED ME TO
BE THE FIRST MEMBER OF " CLU3 13" WHICH WILL ENABLE SELECTED
WINES TO BE LAID DOWN IN THE KAISER STUML CELLARS FOR
NOMINATED PERSONS. I HAVE HAPPILY NOMINATED MY GRANDSON,
ALEXANDER, TO BE THE RECIPIENT OF SOME PORT WHEN HE REACHES
HIS 13TH BIRTHDAY. THIS W'ILL SERVE AS A MATURED MEMORY OF
THE OPENING OF THE NEW KAISER STUHL WINERY CHATEAU D3Y ME
TODAY. 



EMBARGO: 8.00PM THURSDAY 14 MARCH 1974
GOVERNMENT AND BUSINESS
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FIFTH NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF
THE INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS IN AUSTRALIA,
WENTWORTH HOTEL, SYDNEY,
14 MARCH 1974
I HOPE YOU WILL NOT THINK IT TOO PROVOCATIVE OF ME
IF I BEGIN MY ADDRESS TO THIS DISTINGUISHED COMPANY OF
CAPITALISTS BY QUOTING THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO.
THE LAST TIME I SPOKE TO SUCH A LARGE AND POWERFUL
GATHERING OF BUSINESSMEN WAS IN MELBOURNE LAST YEAR
AT A SEMINAR WITH THE INTRIGUING TITLE OF " FUTURE SHOCK".
I LEARNT MY LESSON ON THAT OCCASION: WHERE BUSINESSMEN
ARE CONCERNED, IF YOU CAN'T BEAT ' EM, SHOCK ' EM.
So I COMMEND TO YOU THE FOLLOWING QUOTATION 
-2-
THE BOURGEOISIE, DURING ITS RULE OF SCARCE ONE
HUNDRED YEARS, HAS CREATED MORE MASSIVE AND MORE
COLOSSAL PRODUCTIVE FORCES THAN HAVE ALL PRECEDING
GENERATIONS TOGETHER, SUBJECTION OF NATURE'S
FORCES TO MAN, MACHINERY, APPLICATION OF CHEMISTRY
TO INDUSTRY AND AGRICULTURE, STEAM NAVIGATION,
RAILWAYS, ELECTRIC TELEGRAPHS, CLEARING OF WHOLE
CONTINENTS FOR CULTIVATION, CANALIZATION OF RIVERS,
WHOLE POPULATIONS CONJURED OUT OF THE GROUND
WHAT EARLIER CENTURY HAD EVEN A PRESENTIMENT THAT
SUCH PRODUCTIVE FORCES SLUMBERED IN THE LAP OF
SOCIAL LABOUR?
THAT FINE TRIBUTE TO CAPITALISM WAS PAID BY MARX
AND ENGELS OVER A CENTURY AGO. A SYSTEM THAT CAN EVOKE
SUCH PRAISE FROM ITS WORST ENEMIES CANNOT BE TOO BAD.
TODAY, VERY FEW OF US HAVE MUCH TIME FOR MARXIST THEORIES,
BUT WE HAVE TO ADMIT THAT THE AUTHORS OF THOSE WORDS
PERCEIVED VERY CLEARLY THE ENORMOUS POWER AND PRODUCTIVE
POTENTIAL OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE, AND OF COURSE THEIR
REMARKS HAVE INFINITELY GREATER FORCE TODAY, SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, HARNESSED AND DIRECTED BY PRIVATE CAPITAL,
HAVE BEEN THE MAINSPRING OF ADVANCED WESTERN SOCIETY,
WITH ALL ITS RICH BLESSINGS FOR MANKIND; AND THE
" SUBJECTION OF NATURE'S FORCES TO MAN" HAS PROGRESSED SO
RAPIDLY THAT THE ISSUES IT RAISES ARE NO LONGER THOSE OF
ECONOMICS OR SOCIAL JUSTICE ALONE, THEY CALL IN QUESTION
THE VERY SURVIVAL OF OUR CIVILIZATION, / 3 
3-
IBEGIN ON THIS SOMEWHAT PORTENTOUS NOTE BECAUSEI
BELIEVE THAT IT IS IN THE CONTEXT OF SUCH URGENT CONTEMPORARY
REALITIES THAT WE MUST LOOK AT THE ROLE OF THE MODERN COMPANY,
AND THE PART IT PLAYS IN SHAPING THE KIND OF SOCIETY WE DESir,:.,
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, DESPITE MARX AND DESPITE MALTHUS,
NO ONE FORESAW THE ENORMOUS PRESSURES AND COMPLEXITIES THAT
WOULD OVERTAKE THE MIXED, FREE ENTERPRISE ECONOMY OF THE
PRESENT DAY. OVER-POPULATION WAS STILL A MATHEMATICAL
ABSTRACTION. THE DEPLETION OF THE EARTH'S RAW MATERIALS AND
NATURAL RESOURCES HAD BARELY BEGUN. THE PRESERVATION OF NATIONAL
INTEGRITY AND INDEPENDENCE WERE IDEALISTIC THEORIES LARGELY
IRRELEVANT IN A WORLD COLONIZED B~ Y EUROPEAN POWERS. THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE TO THE PUBLIC INTEREST,
THE GROWTH OF AUTOMATION, THE NEED FOR MANPOWER AND TRAINING
POLICIES THAT TAKE ACCOUNT OF GROW4ING EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES,
THE TECHNICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESSES OF THE MODERN CONSUMER
SOCIETY ALL THESE THINGS WERE UNKNOWN, AND ALL OF THEM
PRESENT CHALLENGES TO THE MODERN INDUSTrRIALIST UNDREAMT : OF
IN PAST GENERATIONS.
As IN SO MANY AREAS OF CONTEMPORARY LIFE, THE GREAT.
ACTIVE PRINCIPLE OF MODERN BUSINESS IS CHANGE; THE INEVITABIILITY
OF CHANGE AND THE NEED TO ADAPT TO CHANGE.-AND THIS CHANGE
NOT SOMETHING IMPOSED FROM ABOVE BY GOVERNMENTS; IT ARISES
FROM DEEP SOCIAL AND HUMAN FORCES TO WHICH GOVERNMENTS M'UST
ADAPT JUST AS MUCH AS BUSINESSMEN. ITS IMPLICATIONS MUST BE
FACED BY GOVERNMENTS AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE ALIKE.
WE AR-E ALLIES, WE ARE PARTNERS, IN THAT TASK. 1 4 
-4-
A FEW FIGURES WILL DEMONSTRATE THE SCALE OF THE
CHALLENGE BEFORE US* AND HOW RAPIDLY EVEN RECENT PREDICTIONS
SEEM LIKELY TO BE INVALIDATED BEFORE THE END OF THIS CENTURY.
ABOUT 150 YEARS AGO 80% OF THE POPULATION HAD TO WORK THE
LAND IN ORDER TO PROVIDE ENOUGH FOOD FOR ALL. ( THIS IS
STILL THE PROPORTION IN CHINA.) TODAY IN THE UNITED
STATES ABOUT 5% OF THE LABOUR FORCE PRODUCE MORE THAN
ENOUGH FOOD FOR ALL AMERICANS AND FOR MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
ABROAD. A REASONABLE PROJECTION INDICATES THAT BY 1980
IT WILL REQUIRE ONLY 2.5% OF THE WORKFORCE IN THE WESTERN
WORLD TO PRODUCE THE FOOD WE NEED. THE SAME TREND IS
APPARENT IN OTHER PRODUCTION INDUSTRIES. THE CONTAINERIZATION
OF FREIGHTI THE MECHANIZATION OF MINING, THE DEVELOPMENT OF
COMPUTERS ALL THESE TRENDS ARE AFFECTING THE COMPOSITION
OF THE WORKFORCE AND THE LIVES OF ORDINARY PEOPLE.
IN THE U. S. A. MANUAL WORKERS NOW MAKE UP ABOUT ONE
THIRD OF THE LABOUR FORCES AND IN THE EUROPEAN INDUSTRIAL
COUNTRIES ABOUT ONE HALF. THE PROPORTION IS STEADILY
SINKING IN ALL INDUSTRIAL NATIONS. BY-THE END OF THE
CENTURY TECHNOLOGY COULD BRING ABOUT AS DRAMATIC A
REDUCTION IN ALL LABOUR AS WE HAVE ALREADY EXPERIENCED
IN AGRICULTURE. AT THE SAME TIME THE RESOURCES OF THE
WORLD ARE BEING DEPLETED AT A RATE THAT MAY LEAVE SOME
BASIC METALS EXHAUSTED WITHIN 30 YEARS. 
THIS IS THE CHALLENGE FOR GOVERNMENTS. THIS IS THE
CHALLENGE FOR ALL THOSE IN CONTROL OF OUR GREAT INDUSTRIES
AND PUBLIC COMPANIES. I THINK BUSINESSMEN ARE ALREADY
BEGINNING TO RECOGNISE CHANGES AND ADAPT TO THEM. VERY FEW
DIRECTORS OR BOARDS OF COMPANIES TODAY WOULD REGARD THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY AS BEING SOLELY TO THE INTERESTS OF THEIR
OWN COMPANY OR ITS SHAREHOLDERS, REGARDLESS OF THE INTERESTS
OF SOCIETY. MANY OF YOU IN THIS ROOM ARE DIRECTORS NOT
OF ONE COMPANY BUT OF TWO OR SEVERAL COMPANIES; YOUR EXPERTISE
AND EXPERIENCE CAN BE APPLIED ACROSS A WIDE RANGE, IN A
MULTITUDE OF INDUSTRIES, SINCE YOU RECOGNISE THAT THE BUSINESS
WORLD IS A DIVERSE AND DYNAMIC COMMUNITY IN WHICH MANY PUBLIC
AND PRIVATE INTERESTS, EVEN NATIONAL INTERESTS, ARE
REPRESENTED. THERE ARE TWO LESSONS WE MUST DRAW FROM THIS. ONE IS
THAT BOARDS OF DIRECTORS CAN NO LONGER BE REGARDED AS
DYNASTIES OR SELF-PERPETUATING ELITES. THE BIGGEST AND MORE
SUCCESSFUL CORPORATIONS ARE OFTEN THOSE WHICH DRAW DIRECTORS
FROM OTHER ORGANISATIONS, BRINGING TOGETHER FRESH TALF'" TS
AND NEW IDEAS. AND THE SECOND LESSON IS THAT DIRECTORS OF LARGI
COMPANIES MUST BE HELD PUBLICLY ACCOUNTABLE FOR THEIR DECISIONS
IF COMPANIES TAKE DECISIONS THAT AFFECT NOT JUS-f THE14SELVE
OR THEIR CLIENTS BUT A WIDER COMMUNITY -TO SAY NOTHING OF
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY WE MUST EXPECT THEM TO EXPLAIN AND
JUSTIFY THOSE DECISIONS. 
-6
WE DO NOT EXPECT THEM TO PRESENT A MONOLITHIC FRONT, ANY
MORE THAN WE EXPECT THE MODERN POLITICAL PARTY TO PRESENT
A MONOLITHIC FRONT; IREGRET THAT THERE IS STILL A TENDENCY
IN AUSTRALIA TO REGARD UNITY.-OR IN A NARROWER SENSEI
UNANIMITY AS MORE VIRTUOUS IN A'POLITICAL PARTY THAN
INTEGRITY OR VIGOUR OR THE FREE FLOW OF IDEAS.
CONTENTION, EVEN DISSENSION, ARE NEEDED IN THE
BOARDROOM JUST AS MUCH AS IN PUBLIC LIFE, FOR IT IS ONLY
THROUGH CONTENTION AND FREE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS THAT WE CAN
REACH INFORMED AND MATURE JUDGEMENTS. YOU WILL ALL BE
FAMILIAR WITH A RECENT INCIDENT INVOLVING A DIRECTOR
OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION. I SHALL
HAVL MURkL TO SAY L-ArLfl AL3) LJ ' 11iL A. 1. ID. C., BUT LET ME SAY
THIS MUCH NOW: 11Y CHIEF REGRET ABOUT SIR JOHN DUNLOP'S
RESIGNATION WAS NOT SO MUCH THAT THE A. I. D. C. LOST A
RESPECTED PROTAGONIST FROM THE BOARD OF THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH
WALES, BUT RATHER THAT THE OLDEST AND ONE OF THE GREATEST
PUBLIC COMPANIES IN AUSTRALIA COULD FIND* NO ROOM IN ITS
BOARDROOM FOR A DISSENTING VOICE. I BELIEVE THAT PRIVATE
COMPANIES HAVE NO LESS AN OBL. IGATION THAN DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNMENTS TO JUSTIFY THEMSELVES IN PUBLIC. ONE OF THE
GREAT VALUES OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL, WHICH
THIS GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED, IS THAT FOR THE FIRST TIME WE
RECOGNISED AND ENACTED THE PRINCIPLE THAT PRIVATE ENTERPRISE
SHOULD BE ACCOUNTABLE TO PUBLIC OPINION FOR DECISIONS THAT
AFFECT THE PUBLIC INTEREST. " OPEN GOVERNMENT" I IS NOT ENOUGH;
It
WE ALSO NEED OPEN BUSINESS a s s17 
-7-
THE TRUTH IS THAT COMPANIES NOW HAVE TO OPERATE
MUCH MORE CLOSELY WITH GOVERNMENTS IN EVERY WAY, THIS IS
CERTAINLY TRUE OF THE GREAT INTERNATIONAL CORPORATIONS,
BUT IT IS NO LESS TRUE OF COMPANIES OPERATING WITHIN
NATIONAL BOUNDARIES, IT WOULD BE A MISTAKE, HOWEVER, TO
REGARD THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN ITS RELATIONS WITH THE
PRIVATE SECTOR AS ONE MERELY OF RESTRAINT OR CONTROL,
TRUE ENOUGH, A SOCIETY IN WHICH EVERYBODY DOES WHAT HE
LIKES IS INCONCEIVABLE, ANY SORT OF HIGHLY DEVELOPED
ORGANISATION IMPOSES UNAVOIDABLE CONSTRAINTS ON THE DRIVES
OF THE INDIVIDUAL, YET I PREFER TO REGARD GOVERNMENT
AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR AS COLLABORATORS RATHER IHAN
RIVALS, THEY WORK BEST WHEN THEY WORK TOGETHER, 
-8-
THE UNIVERSAL TREND IN THE MODERN WORLD IS TOWARDS
MORE INTIMATE AND MORE INTRICATE RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE ENTERPRISE. IN JAPAN, FOR EXAMPLE,
THIS RELATIONSHIP IS INSTITUTIONALIZED IN A NETWORK OF
OFFICIAL CONTACTS BETWEEN INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT; THE POLICIES
OF ONE ARE FOR ALL PRACTICAL PURPOSES THE POLICIES OF THE
OTHER. IN THE SCANDANAVIAN COUNTRIES, NOTABLY IN SWEDEN,
WHERE STATE SUPERVISION OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS PERHAPS
MOST RIGID, GOVERNMENTS AND FREE ENTERPRISE CO-OPERATE TO A
MARKED DEGREE; ENORMOUS STRIDES TOWARDS A SUPER-WELFARE
STATE HAVE BEEN ACCOMPLISHED WITHOUT ANY NATIONALIZATION OF
MAJOR INDUSTRIES, INDEED THOSE INDUSTRIES ARE AMONG THE MOST
EFFICIENT AND PROSPEROUS IN THE WORLD. IN THE UNITED STATES,
WHICH HAS FOR LONG ENFORCED THE MOST RIGOROUS ANTI-TRUST
LAWS OF ANY COUNTRY IN THE FREE WORLD, WE HAVE SEEN IN RECENT
YEARS GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE PRICES AND INCOMES
MECHANISM TO A DEGREE THAT NO ONE WOULD HAVE CONTEMPLATED
EVEN 10 YEARS AGO. IN OUR OWN REGION, WE HAVE THE RECENT
EXAMPLE OF TWO GREAT AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES, l. P, AND C. S. R.,
MAKING TRADE AGREEMENTS WITH CHINA. I NEED HARDLY LABOUR
THE POINT THAT THE OLD RIGID CONCEPTS OF FREE tENTERPRISE, ThiE
OLD-FASHIONED RIVALRIES BETWEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS, T" E
NOTION THAT GOVERNMENTS AND BUSINESSMEN ARE NATURAL ENEMIES
WORKING IN SEPARATE COMPARTMENTSARE DEAD AND BURIED. ,. 1,1/ 9 
8A
I CAN GIVE YOU A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE WAY MY OWN
GOVERNMENT HAS BROKEN THROUGH SOME OF THE RIGID IDEOLOGICAL
BARRIERS THAT SURROUNDED ECONOMIC AND MONETARY POLICY,
IT CONCERNS THE BANKS. FOR A LONG TIME IT WAS ACCEPTED
THAT A LABOR GOVERNMENT SHOULD AVOID TOO MUCH USE OF MARKET
FORCES IN GOVERNING THE ECONOMY. YET THE FACT IS THAT NO
PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS USED THE MECHANISM OF THE
MONEY MARKET MORE THOROUGHLY AND MORE SUCCESSFULLY AS A BASIC
TOOL OF ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT, WE HAVE ELEVATED THE STATUS
AND IMPORTANCE OF THE TRADING BANKS IN AUSTRALIA TO A POSITION
THEY HAVE NOT ENJOYED FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS. WE DID THIS BY
REMOVING THE CEILING ON BANK INTEREST RATES FOR NEGOTIABLE
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT. IN THAT WAY WE ENABLED THE BANKS
TO COMPETE VIGOROUSLY FOR FUNDS ON THE MONEY MARKET.
fNSTEAD OF BEING THE FIRST INSTITUTIONS TO FEEL THE EFFECTS
OF NECESSARY MONETARY RESTRICTIONS, THE BANKS ARE THE
BENEFICIARIES; OTHER INSTITUTIONS ARE FORCED TO COMPETE
WITH THEM. I SUGGEST THAT THE EXTRAORDINARY SUCCESS OF OUR
FEBRUARY LOAN, WHICH ATTRACTED $ 509 MILLION IN CASH SUBSCRIPTIONS,
IS EVIDENCE OF THE NEW ROLE WE HAVE GIVEN TO THE BANKS.
THE PRIVATE BANKS FOR SO LONG ANATHEMA TO LABOR GOVERNMENTS
ARE BACK ON TOP, I WELCOME THE FACT, THEY ARE GREAT IIISTITUTIONS
MY ONLY REGRET IS THAT I HAVE YET TO HEAR ANY ACKNOWLEDGFMENT
FROM THEM OF THE FACT THAT A LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS RESTORED THEIR
-POSITION AS THE-DOMINANT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN THIS COUNTRY.
I AM AFRAID THAT IT IS ONLY WHEN COMPLAINTS ARE BEING HEARD
THAT YOU CAN BANK ON THE WAILS. / 9 
-9-
WHATEVER THE BANKS MAY THINKI PUT IT TO YOU
THAT THERE ARE NOW CLOSER CONTACTS BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND
BUSINESS IN THIS COUNTRY THAN EVER BEFORE AND THEY ARE
GENUINE CONTACTS, NOT TOKEN GESTURES, NOT WINDOW DRESSING.
WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO -AND SUCCEEDED IN DOING IS DRAW
BUSINESSMEN OF THE HIGHEST CALIBRE INTO THE PROCESSES OF
DECISION MAKING AND POLICY FORMATION. THERE ARE LEADING
BUSINESSMEN ON MANY OF THE EXPERT AND INDEPENDENT BODIES
WE HAVE SET UP TO ADVISE THE GOVERNMENT ON POLICY MATTERS.
NOW YOU MAY THINK THAT IS A FAIRLY OBVIOUS THING TO DO,
BUT IT WAS NOT A PRACTICE THAT COMMENDED ITSELF TO OUR
PREDECESSORS. CONSIDER WHAT HAPPENED TO THE VERNON COMMITTEE,
WHICH WAS APPOINTED BY SIR ROBERT MENZIES IN FEBRUARY 1963
TO REPORT ON FUTURE GUIDELINES FOR ECONOMIC POLICY, ITS
REPORT WAS DELIVERED IN MAY 1965, IT WAS TABLED IN AUGUST
1966, IN OTHER WORDS, IT WAS SUPPRESSED BY THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT FOR 15 MONTHS; ITS ADVICE WAS IGNORED.
I TAKE PRIDE IN THE FACT THAT THE FOUR SURVIVING
MEMBERS OF THAT COMMITTEE HAVE ALL RENDERED DISTINGUISHED SERVICE
TO THIS GOVERNMENT AND TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE SIR JAMES
VERNON AS HEAD OF THE INQUIRY INTO THE POST OFFICE,
SIR JOHN CRAWFORD, AUTHOR OF THE REPCRT ON WHICH THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION WAS BASED; PROFESSOR PETER
KARMELI HEAD OF THE INTERIM SCHOOLS COMMITTEE AND AUTHOR OF
THE REPORT INTO EDUCATIONAL NEEDS; AND MR, KENNETH MYERI
A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY. 
10
WE HAVE ASKED MANY OTHER PROMINENT BUSINESSMEN TO
PARTICIPATE IN INQUIRIES INTO ASPECTS OF GOVERNMENT POLICY,
IMENTION A FEW: MR. R. KINGSFORD-SMITH, CHAIRMAN AND
MANAGING DIRECTOR OF HAWKER DE HAVILLAND, A MEMBER OF A
WORKING GROUP TO STUDY THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY; MR. K. S. HEDLEY,
A MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY;
MR. N. M. GOW, A MEMBER OF THE TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION
COMMITTEE; MR. D. YENKEN AND MR. KEITH'VALLANCEI MEMBERS OF THE
TASK FORCE ON THE NATIONAL ESTATE; MR. JACK HANNES,* MANAGING
DIRECTOR OF HANIMEX CORPORATION LIMITED, A MEMBER OF THE
INTERIM COMMISSION ON CONSUMER STANDARDS; MR. G. POLITES,
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF EMPLOYERS
FEDERATIONS, AND SIR THOMAS WARDLE OF PERTH, MEMBERS OF THE
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT. SIR THOMAS
WARDLE IS ALSO A MEMBER OF THE INTERIM ADVISORY BOARD OF THE
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE AGENCY. WE HAVE APPOINTED FOUR NOTED
BUSINESSMEN MR. L. R. DUDLEY, MR. G. P. HAMPEL, MR, GEORGE
JOHNSON, AND MR. C. H. GRACE TO THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE
COMMISSION. WE HAVE REAPPOINTED SIR BRIAN MASsy-GREENE AS A
DIREC-TOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION AND AS A
MEMBER OF THE-MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES ADVISORY COUNCIL.
OF COURSE I CANNOT UNDERTAKE THAT ALL THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THESE BODIES WILL BE ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT, BUT THEIR
MEMBERS CAN BE ASSURED OF THIS: THEIR ADVICE WILL BE PUBLISHED
AND PUBLISHED PROMPTLY. IT-WILL NOT BE SUPPRESSED OR FORGOTTEN.
IT WILL CONTRIBUTE TO A CLIMATE OF OPEN PUBLIC DEBATE. IT ' A ILL
BECOME PART OF THE DECISION MAKING PROCESS. SO LET US HEAR NO
MORE ABOUT LACK OF CONSULTATION. No OTHER GOVERNMENT IN
FRAMING ITS POLICIES HAS DRAWN SO WIDELY AND REWARDINGLY ON
THE SERVICES OF BUSINESSMEN. 
11
IWANT TO DEAL IN A MOMENT WITH THREE PARTICULAR ASPECTS
OF GOVERNMENT POLICY WHICH CONCERN You. BUT FIRST, I HAVE ONE
MORE GENERAL OBSERVATION, ASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT A GREAT
DEAL OF WHAT THE GOVERNMENT IS ATTEMPTING TO DO HAS ALREADY
BEEN ATTEMPTED AND ACHIEVED IN OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES IN SOME
CASES, MANY DECADES AGO. SOME OF YOU MAY RECALL THAT LAST
NOVEMBER, BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL CONDUCTED A SEMINAR IN CANBERRA
AT WHICH THE POLICIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WERE EXAMINED
FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS COMMUNITY.
WE WERE HONOURED ON THAT OCCASION BY THE PRESENCE OF MRiORVILLE
FREEMAN, WHO SERVED WITH DISTINCTION IN THE KENNEDY AND JOHNSON
ADMINISTRATIONS AND WHOSE NAME IS RESPECTED THROUGHOUT THE
BUSINESS WORLD. LET ME READ TO YOU SOME OF THE CONCLUSIONS REACHED
By BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL ABOUT THE POLICIES OF THIS GOVERNMENT.
IF I WERE-WRITING THE REPORT MYSELF I MIGHT EXPRESS THESE VIEWS
WITH RATHER MORE ENTHUSIASM, BUT THEIR GENERAL DRIFT WILL BE
CLEAR TO You. BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL SAID THIS:
MANY OF ITS PROGRAMS ( THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS)
WILL MERELY BRING AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION AND PRACTICES
INTO LINE WITH THOSE IN FORCE IN THE U. S. AND WESTERN
EUROPE. ITS SOCIAL SECURITY REFORMS ARE SIMILAR TO THOSE
IN FORCE IN MANY WEST EUROPEAN COUNTRIES FOR SOME YEARS;
ITS NEW ANTITRUST LAWS ARE MODELLED ON THOSE OF THE U. S.,
WITHOUT BEING SO SEVERE AS THE U. S, LAWS; ITS PROPOSED
SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION WILL ALSO BE MODELLED ON
U. S. LINES, BUT ITS REGULATIONS WILL BE LESS COMPLEX;
SIMILARLY, IF THE GOVERNMENT PROCEEDS WITH PROGRAMS FOR
WORKER PARTICIPATION IN MANAGEMENT, THESE WILL-BE MODELLED
ON SWEDISH AND WEST GERMAN PRACTICES. 
12-
WHILE THE GOVERNMENT HAS INTRODUCED SOME ECONOMIC
PLANNING, THIS IS LESS RIGOROUS THAN EVEN THE
PLANNING OF THE UK GOVERNMENT TODAY, THE MAIN
EXPRESSION OF THE GOVERNMENT'S NEW THRUST WILL BE
IN GREATER EXPENDITURE ON SOCIAL SERVICES, AND IN
GREATER REGULATION OF BUSINESS, RATHER THAN IN
STATE OWNERSHIP,
THE REPORT THEN MAKES SOME MODERATELY KIND REFERENCES
TO ME AND SOME OF MY COLLEAGUES, THE " KEY FIGURES" IN THE
GOVERNMENT, IT SAYS, ARE " PRAGMATIC MODERATES WHO EMPHASISED THAT
THEY WELCOMED AND ENCOURAGED CONTINUED OUTSIDE INVESTMENT
IN AUSTRALIA, ALTHOUGH SUBJECT TO CERTAIN NEW GUIDELINES,,,,"
THE REPORT GOES ON:
ALL AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY AGREE THAT POPULAR SENTIMENT DEMANDED AN
END OF THE OPEN DOOR POLICY TOWARD FOREIGN INVESTMENT
WHICH PREVAILED UNTIL LATE 1972; THE FIRST STEPS
TO END THAT POLICY WERE IN FACT TAKEN BY THE
PREVIOUS LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT,
FINALLY, WITH SINGULAR SHREWDNESS AND GOOD
JUDGMENTI THE REPORT CONCLUDES: " IT IS LIKELY THAT THE
WHIITLAM GOVERNMENT WILL REMAIN IN POWER FOR SOME TIME TO COME,"
I MUST SAY THAT I HAVE A VERY HIGH OPINION OF BUSINESS
INTERNATIONAL, I HOPE THAT OPINION IS SHARED BY ALL OF YOU,
RADICAL WE MAY BE, DETERMINED WE MAY BE, VIGOROUS WE CERTAINLY
ARE; BUT THERE IS NOTHING IN OUR POLICIES TOWARDS BUSINESS
THAT WOULD BE CONSIDERED NOVEL, IMPETUOUS OR UNPRECEDENTED IN
ANY OTHER WESTERN COUNTRY, ,/ 13 1 
13
IN OUR APPROACH TO BUSINESS WE HAVE THREE BASIC
OBJECTIVES. WE WANT TO ENSURE, FIRST OF ALL, THAT
THE PRIVATE SECTOR REMAINS BUOYANT, PROSPEROUS AND
EFFICIENT. WE WANT TO ENSURE THAT AS FAR AS POSSIBLE
THE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES AND
RESOURCES REMAIN IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS, AND WE WANT TO
ENSURE THAT THE AFFAIRS OF AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES, AND
THE SECURITIES INDUSTRY ITSELF, ARE SUBJECT TO FAIR AND
REASONABLE LAWS, APPLIED UNIFORMLY ACROSS THE NATION IN
THE INTERESTS OF INVESTORS, CONSUMERS, SHAREHOLDERS,
BUSINESSMEN AND THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE.
LET ME DEAL WITH THE LAST POINT FIRST. THE GOVERNMENT
IS PLEDGED TO LEGISLATE FOR A NATIONWIDE COMPANIES ACT.
THE QUEST FOR UNIFORM COMPANY LAW IN AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN A
LONG AND SORRY STORY OF FRUSTRATION AND DISAPPOINTMENT
YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT A MEETING OF ATTORNEYS-GENERAL
IN 1959 RESULTED EVENTUALLY IN THE PRODUCTION OF A MODEL
DRAFT BILL IN 1960, Now WHILE THAT INITIATIVE LED TO
CERTAIN REFORMS IN COMPANY LAW AND TO A MUCH GREATER
MEASURE OF UNIFORMITY, CONSIDERABLE DIFFERENCES REMAINED
IN THE LAWS BETWEEN DIFFERENT STATES. THEY WILL ONLY BE
REMOVED BY NATIONAL LEGISLATION. FOR MORE THAN 60 YEARS,
HOWEVER, ATTEMPTS AT A UNIFORM COMPANY LAW WERE HAMPERED BY A
HIGH COURT DECISION IN 1909, THE COURT GAV. E A HIGHLY RESTRICTIVE
INTERPRETATION OF THE CORPORATIONS POWER OF THE COMMONWEALTH
UNDER THE CONSTITUTION. THAT DECISION WAS EVENTUALLY OVERRULED
BY A UNANIMOUS JUDGEMENT OF THE COURT IN SEPTEMBER 1971.
THE WAY WAS THEN OPEN FOR LEGISLATION ON A NATIONWIDE SCALE. ./ 14 
14
WE HAVE HAD ONE STRIKING DEMONSTRATION OF THE
OBSTACLES TO UNIFORMITY WHEN LAWS OF THIS KIND ARE LEFT
TO THE STATES, IN THE EARLY 1960s, FOLLOWING THE FAILURE
OF CERTAIN PUBLIC BORROWING CORPORATIONS, VICTORIA INTRODUCED
A COMPANIES ( PUBLIC BORROWINGS) ACT WHICH CAME. INTO OPERATION
ON 1 FEBRUARY 1964. NEW SOUTH WALES AND QUEENSLAND FOLLOWED
IN JULY 1964, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA IN
JANUARY 1965 AND TASMANIA IN JANUARY 1967, THUS IT TOOK
NEARLY THREE YEARS BEFORE ALL AUSTRALIANS HAD THE PROTECTION
OF THIS LEGISLATION, WHILE DIRECTORS, LAWYERS AND ACCOUNTANTS
SOUGHT TO KEEP TRACK OF DIFFERENT LAWS FROM PLACE TO PLACE,
YET A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, SEIZED WITH THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS
REFORM, COULD HAVE DONE THE JOB AT ONCE,
ONE OF THE FEARS THAT IS SOMETIMES EXPRESSED ABOUT
NATIONA LEGISLATION IS THAT IT WILL SOMEHOW BECOME A VEHICLE
FOR SOCIAL REFORM RATHER THAN REMAIN A MERE PIECE OF ENABLING
LEGISLATION, I DO NOT SEE WHY WE SHOULD BE ASHAMED OF
SOCIAL RLFURIM, WE TAKE ALTOGETHER TOO NARROW A VIEW OF COMPANY
LAW IF WE INSIST THAT IT CONFINE ITSELF TO THE TECHNICALITIES
OF ADMINISTRATION, AGAIN, IT IS TOO NARROW A VIEW TO INSIST
THAT ONLY DIRECTORS, SHAREHOLDERS AND CREDITORS HAVE AN
INTEREST IN THE ACTIVITIES OF A COMPANY, NO LAW IS DEVOID CF
SOCIAL CONTENT, THE RECENT BRITISH WHITE PAPER ON COMPANY
LAW REFORM SAID THIS: 
15
" A BOARD OF DIRECTORS HAS TO RECONCILE SEVERAL
INTERESTS, OF WHICH PROFIT IS THE MAIN BUT
CANNOT BE THE ONLY ONE. ANY COMPANY MUST
BEHAVE AS A RESPONSIBLE PART OF THE SOCIETY
IN WHICH IT EXISTS. THIS REQUIRES COMPANY
DIRECTORS, ON BEHALF OF THE SHAREHOLDERS,
TO DISCHARGE THEIR SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES
AS WELL AS TO PROTECT THEIR LEGITIMATE INTERESTS."
IACCEPT THAT VIEW. ICOMMEND IT TO YOU. IN AUSTRALIA
WE WILL IN DUE COURSE HAVE COMPANY LEGISLATION WITH A
SIMILAR SOCIAL CONTENT. ONLY AN AUSTRALIAN CANUTE WOULD
ATTEMPT TO STEM THAT TIDE. TO RESIST THE INTRODUCTION OF
NATIONAL COMPANIES LEGISLATION BECAUSE OF ITS POSSIBLE
SOCIAL. CONfFNT IS TO BE BLIND TO THE DYNAMICS OF LAW AND
THE NEEDS OF TilE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC.
WE SEE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION AS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF OUR DRIVE FOR
UNIFORM CUMFANY LAW. IREMIND YOU THAT OUR OPPONENTS ARE
AS FULLY COMMITTED AS WE ARE TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
COMM ISS IuN, WE STILL AWAIT THE REPORT OF THE SENATE
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMITTEE, WHICH WAS ESTABLISHED
IN MARCH 1970. IN THE MEANTIME, HOWEVER, CABINET HAS
AUTHORISED THE ATTioRNEY-GENERAL TO PREPARE LEGISLATION
FOR A c~~ i~ INAND THAT WORK IS GOING FORWARD WITH
ALL POSSIBLE SPEED, 16 
16
I TURN NOW TO ONE OF THE GREAT AND ABIDING
THEMES OF MY GOVERNMENT'S PHILOSOPHY. I HAVE SAID
THAT ONE OF OUR PRINCIPAL OBJECTIVES IS TO MAXIMISE
AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR INDUSTRIES
AND RESOURCES. AS YOU KNOW, THE GREAT INSTRUMENTS
WE ARE DEVELOPING FOR THAT PURPOSE ARE THE AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND THE ASSOCIATED
NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUND, WHEN I SAY THAT THESE ARE
OUR OBJECTIVES, OUR POLICIES, IT IS IMPORTANT TO
REMEMBER THIS: THEY WERE INTRODUCED AND DEVELOPED
IN RESPONSE TO A CLEAR AND UNEQUIVOCAL PUBLIC DEMAND.
THERE WAS NO MISTAKING THAT DEMAND. THERE ARE CERTAIN
ISSUES IN POLITICS, CERTAIN CURRENTS OF POPULAR FEELING,
THAT IMPINGE ON THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF ALL PARTIES AND
HELP SHAF. A CONSENSUS OF THOUGHT AND ACTION.
OUR OPPONEivTS RECOGNISED THOSE PRESSURES. THEY KNEW
AS WELL AS ' E DID THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WERE NO
LONGER WILLING TO SEE THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY FALL
INCREASINGLY INTO FOREIGN HANDS. THEY ESTABLISHED
THE WE IN TURN HAVE RESOLVED TO EXPAND AND
STRENGTHEN IT. THE A. I. D. C. WAS BORN OUT OF A
REALISATION THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR A SPECIALISED
INSTITUTION CAPABLE OF MOBILISING AND CHANNELLING CAPITAL
OFTEN IN LARGE AMOUNTS INTO NATIONALLY IMPORTANT
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BY COMPANIES OWNED AND CONTROLLED
IN AUSTRAL. IA. OUR PROPOSALS WILL REMOVE UNREALISTIC
RESTRICTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN PLACED ON THE CORPORATION SINCE
ITS INCEPTION, THEY WILL ENABLE IT TO CARRY OUT MORE
THOROUGHLY AND MORE EFFICIENTLY THE TASK EXPECTED OF IT. 
17
IN ALL THE CRITICISM I HAVE HEARD OF THE CORPORATION
AND THE NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUND, I HAVE YET TO HEAR
ANY SERIOUS CRITICISM OF THEIR FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVE.
THERE IS, AFTER ALL, NOTHING SURPRISING) NOTHING NARROW
OR XENOPHOBIC, IN THE DEMAND FOR GREATER AUSTRALIAN
PARTICIPATION IN THE CONTROL OF OUR ECONOMIC DESTINY.
SO IF I TAKE TIME TO DEAL WITH YOUR ANXIETIES AND
CRITICISMS, LET IT NOT BE THOUGHT THAT I AM ON THE
DEFENSIVE. NOT ONLY DO I BELIEVE IN MY HEART THAT OUR
PROPOSALS ARE RIGHT AND OVERDUE: I BELIEVE THAT YOU,
AS GOOD AUSTRALIANS, AS BUSINESSMEN OF PRIDE AND INTEGRITY,
BELIEVE IN YOUR OWN HEARTS IN THE NEED FOR THESE REFORMS.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER THAT OUR PROPOSALS ARE
AS MUCH CONCERNED WITH MAXIMISING INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT
GENERALLY AS THEY ARE WITH MAXIMISING AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP
AND CONTROL IN THAT DEVELOPMENT. A. I. D. C. IS ONLY ONE OF
MANY INSTITUTIONS THAT CAN AND DO PROVIDE DEVELOPMENT
FINANCE. SIR ALAN WESTERMAN, THE EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
OF MADE THIS POINT SUCCINCTLY IN A SUBMISSION
TO THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN OWNERSHIP AND
CONTROL, SIR ALAN SAID:
" I DO NOT SEE THE BASIC QUESTION AS BEING
WHETHER A. I. D. C. OR SOME ALTERNATIVE MECHANISM
IS 7HE BEST WAY TO FINANCE DEVELOPMENT AND
GET MORE AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION IN IT.
I DO NOT BELIEVE FOR A MOMENT THAT A. I. D. C.
COULD DO THAT JOB ALONE. THERE ARE A VARIETY
OF GOVERNMENTAL POLICY MEASURES AND INSTITUTIONS
THAT DO OR COULD HAVE A ROLE 
18
To ME THE REAL QUESTION IS WHETHER
THERE IS A ROLE FOR A SPECIAL KIND OF
INSTITUTION SUCH As A. I. D. C. WHICH, DIRECTED
NOT JUST TOWARDS NORMAL SHAREHOLDERS I OBJECTIVES
FOR A PARTICULAR PROJECT BUT TO THE WIDER
NATIONAL OBJECTIVES SET FOR IT, WOULD ACTIVELY
PURSUE THOSE OBJECTIVES ( AND-ONLY THOSE OBJECTIVES)
THROUGH ITS OWN COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AND
NEGOTIATIONS IN THE MARKET PLACE. IT HAS ALREADY
BEEN ACCEPTED BY PARLIAMENT AND I BELIEVE THE
COMMUNITY GENERALLY THAT A. I. D. C. IS TO HAVE
THAT ROLE. IF THIS IS SO I WOULD HOPE THERE SHOULD
BE NO OBJECTION TO IT BEING PROPERLY EQUIPPED FOR
THE JOB."
THE POINT IS MADE BY SOME CRITICS THAT THE EXPAN SION
OF A. I. D. C. WILL LEAD TO INCREASED COMPETITION AMONG
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR AVAILABLE DOMESTIC SAVINGS,
RESULTING IN HIGHER INTEREST RATES AND A DIVERSION OF
FUNDS FROM ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS SAVINGS
BANKS, BUILDING SOCIETIES AND LIFE OFFICES. NOW AS FAR
AS I AM AWARE, THERE IS NOTHING IN ECONOMIC THEORY WHICH
SAYS THAT THE ADVENT OF A NEW FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY, OR
THE EXPANSION OF AN ESTABLISHED ONE, WILL PUSH UP INTEREST
RATES, IN FACT, IF NEW SAVINGS ARE GENERATED AND FUNDS
DIVERTED FROM INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT OTHERWISE HAVE INVESTED
DIRECT, IT MAY HELP TO REDUCE THE AVERAGE COST OF MONEY IN
THE COMMUNITY. WE BELIEVE THAT INTENSIFIED COMPETITION FOR
FUNDS Ar,, ONG FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES WILL MAKE THESE INSTITUTIONS
MORE COST-CONSCIOUS AND INNOVATIVE, AND THAT IN TURN WILL
REDUCE THE MARGINS BETWEEN THEIR BORROWING AND LENDING RATES. 
19
IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION THAT THE ADDITIONAL
FUNDS CHANNELLED INTO RESOURCE-DEVELOPMENT AND INDUSTRIAL
PROJECTS SHOULD BE DIVERTED ULTIMATELY FROM LESS ESSENTIAL
PURPOSES, SUCH AS HIGH-RISE CITY BUILDINGS, RATHER THAN
FROM HOME-BUYING OR PUBLIC AUTHORITY S-PENDINGa
ANOTHER POINT MADE BY OUR CRITICS IS THAT THE NEW
A. I. D. C. AND THE N. I. F. WILL BE ATTEMPTING TO SATISFY
NEEDS WHICH ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS ARE ALREADY SATISFYING
ADEQUATELY. MY ANSWER IS THAT ESTABLISHED INSTITUTIONS
HAVE NO OBLIGATION AND EVEN LESS INCLINATION TO
PURSUE NATIONAL POLICY OBJECTIVES SINGLE-MINDEDLY AND
PURPOSEFULLY. AI. I), C. WAS ESTABLISHED TO HELP FINANCE
NATIONALLY DESIRABLE INDUSTRIAL AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT;
TO PROMOTE MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION
IN IMPORTANT ENTERPRISES, AND TO HELP FIL L
GAPS IN THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL MARKET. THE INEW L-LGISLATION
WILL ENABLE THE CORPORATION TO FULFIL THESE NATIONAL
RESPONSIBILITIES MORE EFFECTIVELY. REMEMBER, IF ANY
AUSTRALIAN INVESTOR WANTS TO BUY A SHARE DIRECT IN A
LISTED PUBLIC COMPANY, THERE IS NOTHING IN OUR PROPOSALS
TO STOP HIM OR TO AUTHORISE A. I. DIC. TO FORCE HIM TO
INVEST THROUGH THE INSTEAD. THE TROUBLE IS THAT
IT IS NOT ALWAYS PluSSIolL E AUSTRfALIANS TO. INVEST IN
FOREIGN-OPERATED ENTERPRISES, ESPECIALLY WHEN THEY ARE SET
UP AS SUBSIDIARY PRIVATE COMPANIES OR EVEN AS BRANCHES OF
THE OVERSEAS CONGLOMERATE. 
20
AND EVEN WHERE IT IS POSSIBLE TO INVEST, UNLESS THE
INDIVIDUAL HOLDING IS A VERY BIG ONE IT WILL COMMAND
NO EFFECTIVE SAY WHATEVER IN SEEING IHA~ lI E COMPANY
FOLLOWS POLICIES IN THE INTERESTS OF AUSTRALIA.
IN SHORT, IT HAS LITTLE OR NOTHING TO DO WITH A. I. DoCs
OBJECTIVES$ IN AN4Y CASE, IT IS NOT THE JOB OF A. I. DsCs TO DISPLACE
AUSTRALIAN EQUITY INV'ESTMENT OF THAT KIND. IT IS DESIGNED
TO ADD TO IT, BY DISPLACING SOME OF WHAT WOULD OTHERWISE
BE FOREIGN INVESTMENT. IT SHOULD THUS BE ABLE TO DO A LOT
TO STRENGTHEN THE AUSTRALIAN SAY IN THE DIRECTION OF
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES. THERE IS
CERTAINLY NOTHING IN OUR PROPnFA. S TH~ AT * VvLL. DEP~ IRIVE N. I. F.
BONDHOLDERS, PROTECTED AS THEY ARE BY A SUPERVISORY COUNCIL,
FROM ANY OF THE PRACTICAL BENEFITS OF OWNERSHIP THAT THEY
WOULD ENJOY BY SMALL IPORTFOLIO'I HOLDINGS OF SHARES LET
ALONE FROM INVESTMENT VIA A UNIT TRUST OR INVESTMENT
COMPANY OR A LIFE OR PENSION FUND. FAR FROM DIVERTING
EQUITY FUNDS FROM STOCK EXCHANGES, OUR PROPOSALS WILL
CREATE A NEW EQUITY INSTRUMENT ( THE INVESTMENT BONDS)
TRADED ON THE EXCHANGES, AND RAISE FUNDS FOR EQUITY
INVESTMENT FROM MANY ORDINARY PEOPLE WHO WOULD NEVER
THINK OF INVESTING THROUGH THE STOCK EXCHANGE. 
21
WHEN THE A. I. D. C. WAS FIRST PROPOSED BY SIR JOHN
MCEWENI IT WAS REGARDED IN SOME QUARTERS AS A DANGEROUSLY
RADICAL CREATION, SOME MEMBERS OF THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT
SAW IT AS A SACRED DUTY TO FIGHT THE AIDC, AS PART OF
THEIR HOLY CRUSADE AGAINST SOCIALISM, I BELIEVE BUSINESSMEN
TODAY ARE OUTGROWING THESE INSTINCTIVE PREJUDICES; YOU ARE
SHREWD ENOUGH TO JUDGE ANY GOVERNMENT MEASURE ON REALISTIC
AND FACTUAL GROUNDS, THE FACT IS THAT THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
COMPLAIN TODAY ABOUT " NATIONALIZATION BY STEALTH MADE THE
SAME CHARGE AGAINST THE MENZIES GOVERNMENT'S BANKING
LEGISLATION IN 1957, WHAT IS STEALTHY OR FURTIVE ABOUT
OUR PROPOSALS? I HAVE BEEN ADVOCATING THEM PUBLICLY FOR YEARS,
THEY HAVE BEEN OPENLY DEBATED INSIDE AND OUTSIDE PARLIAMENT,
OUR INTENTIONS ARE CLEARLY EXPRESSED IN THE LEGISLATION,
THE WHOLE OF AIDC,' s ACTIVITIES ARE SUBJECT TO AUDIT,
ITS ACTIVITIES CAN BE SCRUTINISED BY THE PARLIAMENT,
IF MY YEARS IN PUBLIC LIFE HAVE TAUGHT ME ONE THING,
IF THE EXPERIENCE OF WESTERN GOVERNMENTS IN ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT HAS PROVED ANYTHING IN RECENT YEARS, IT IS
SIMPLY THAT THERE ARE NO LONGER ANY CLEAR-CUT OR USEFUL
DISTINCTIONS TO BE DRAWN BETWEEN FREE ENTERPRISE POLICIES ON THE
ONE HAND AND INTERVENTIONIST POLICIES ON THE OTHER, FOR ALL
THEIR SLO3ANS AND CATCHCRIES, POLITICAL PARTIES OF ALL SHADES1
IN ALL COUNTRIES, NOW ACCEPT THAT DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS
MUST CO-OPERATE WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN THE RUNNING OF
A MIXED ECONOMY, / 22 
22
BOTH SIDES HAVE A COMMON CONCERN, A SIMPLE CONCERN
TO ENSURE THAT THE SYSTEM WORKS, WHO IS DOCTRINAIRE
ON THESE ISSUES? WE WHO SEEK CO-OPERATION, OR THOSE WHO
INSIST THAT NO CO-OPERATION IS POSSIBLE? WHO ARE THE DOGMATISTS
AND REACTIONARIES? WE WHO ACKNOWLEDGE THE REALITY OF CHANGE,
OR THOSE WHO FEAR CHANGE OF ANY KIND? WHO ARE THE IDEOLOGUES?
WE WHO REMAIN FLEXIBLE, CANDID IN OUR AIMS, PRAGMATIC IN OU7
APPROACH, OR THOSE WHO BELIEVE THAT THE ENORMOUS PROBLEMS OF
MODERN INDUSTRIAL ECONOMIES, AND THE THREAT THEY POSE TO
SOCIAL HARMONY AND JUSTICE, WILL BE SOLVED BY 19TH CENTURY
SLOGANS OF LAISSEZ-FAIRE CAPITALISM? ONCE IT MIGHT HAVE
BEEN POSSIBLE TO HOPE THAT THE CHALLENGES OF AUTOMATION,
OF POPULATION, OF RESOURCES DIPLOMACY, OF INFLATION,
OF POLLUTION, OF NATIONAL OWNERSHIP, WOULD SOMEHOW SOLVE
THEMSELVES IF LEFT ALONE, NO ONE BELIEVES THAT NOW,
THE PROBLEMS ARE INESCAPABLE; AND IF THERE IS ANY
CONSOLATION IN FACING SUCH TESTING AND UNCERTAIN TIMES,
IT IS IN THE KNOWLEDGE THAT THE GREAT CREATIVE EPOCHS IN
HUMAN AFFAIRS HAVE BEEN EPOCHS OF CHANGE AND TRIAL, 



EMBARGO: 6 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING CEREMONY AT THE NEW A. B. C. BUILDING COMPLEX,
COLLINSWOOD, ADELAIDE, FRIDAY 29 MARCH 1974
It is almost 42 years since the Australian Broadcasting
Commission was founded with the requirement that it " shall
broadcast from the national broadcasting stations adequate
and comprehensive programs, and shall take in the interests
of the community all such measures as in the opinion of the
Commission are conducive to the full development of suitable
broadcasting programs". At this time the Commission began its
operations in South Australia from an old stone building in
Hindmarsh Square the first freehold property " acquired" by
the A. B. C. in Australia. Today the Commission is able finally
to house itself in Adelaide in up-to-date adequate accommodation,
The new ten-storey administration, radio and orchestral
studio complex here at Collinswood is spacious and, among other
things, fully airconditioned. The building will provide vastly
improved accommodation for all administrative and program
departments, News, Technical Services, Publicity, " TV Times",
Staff Association and Credit Union Offices. Large studios for
the South Australian Symphony Orchestra and for light
entertainment programs and two smaller studios for drama and
general production are already fully operative. Hindmarsh
Square ill be completely vacated by late this year when the
last A. B. C. units have moved into this new building.
It is appropriate that such a long-needed development
is taking place in 1974. For it appears that this year will
be one of great modernisation for the A. B. C. It is only about
two weeks since the Minister for the Media, Senator Doug
McClelland, tabled in the Federal Parliament the document which
provides for modernisation.
I refer, of course, to the report prepared by the
Management Consultants, McKinsey Company. The report suggests
a number of important recommendations for the future development
of the A. B. C. These ' range from management organisation to
program output. By the nature of its charter, the Commission itself
will take the final decision on acceptance or otherwise of
the McKinsey Report recommendations, although inevitably the
government will be involved if these proposals require
amendments to existing legislation. There is, however, one
simple decision, involving both the Commission and the
government which has already been made and the importance of
which can easily be overlooked. This is the decision to make
the McKinsey Report public. When the company made a similar
study of the its report there was not published.
Both the A. B. C. and the Government decided that the British
precedent should not be followed in the handling of what is
after all a report for Australians about their national
broadcasting system.
Looking beyond the needs of Australians generally,
the government and the Commission decided that it was important
for the staff of the A. B. C. 6,700 people that they should have 
-2-
ready access to the report. It is too important a document
about too important an institution involving too many people
for it to remain the subject of rumour and speculation.
In as much as mora~ le problems may exist within the A. B. C.,
I trust that our action in publishing the report indicates
a desire and a willingness for the staff to participate in
the debate that flows from it. Indeed, it is interesting that
the first through discussion, including an interview with the
A. B. C. Chairman, took place on an A. B. C. program, " This Day
Tonight". It was especially appropriate for this program
to open the debate fully and, dare I say it, even with some
relish. While there may be a need for modernising the A. B. C.,
" This Day Tonight" and its sister program, " Four Corners"
symbolises the need for the durability of certain basic
principles in the operation of the organisation. They, more
than any other programs, have been the subject of controversy
arising out of these principles. Simply stated, they have
been central to the debate about the independence and freedom
from political interference of the organisation. They have
involved men and women whose determination to maintain
independence and to resist interference deserves high praise.
There will, of course, be some argument about the extent
to which the independence and freedom of the A. B. C. have been
threatened. I know that previous Chairmen of the A. B. C. have
stated that such trends have always been exaggerated. I will
say now, however, that those trends have at times been real,
although some of them have been implicit rather than stated.
I have only to mention what happened in the 1960s when an
interview of a former French Premier, M Bidault, was banned
to establish my point. I have only to mention what happened
to " The Quiet Mutiny", a program about Vietnam produced
by an Australian, John Pilger, and what happened about " End
of Dialogue", a program on apartheid in South Africa, to
support my point.
I would mention in this context the disquiet I expressed
in a speech in 1971 about what I saw as a new means of potential
unilateral censorship. I spoke then about the dangers of applying
too rigidly a policy of not allowing a point of view to be put on
the A. B. C. if the opposing point of view was not presented more
or less at the same time. I pointed out that it would be absurd
for the one point of view not to be put simply because its opponents
chose to remain silent. By all means, they should be given the
opportunity to speak but, by no means, should their decision to
remain silent enable the stifling of the viewpoint which they oppose.
" It is wrong that politicians of either Party should in effect be
able to censor a debate by refusal to appear," I said then. 
-3
Pressure against the A. B. C. has always involved means
other than direct approach or intervention. A public statement,
even if unaccompanied by action, can in itself be a source of
pressure, designed to frighten men and women engaged in the
delicate task of presenting information about matters of public
controversy. I have no reason to revise my suspicious views
of the motives of a former Postmaster-General who could say:
" I think in some programs there is not what I would call a
proper balance, which gets very close to leading to bias on
the program and I don't merely say political bias."
I see no reason to revise my suspicions of the motives of
the same man who said in the same statement that the Australian
Broadcasting Commissioners should preview controversial programs
of programs that were likely to be controversial. I certainly
see no reason to revise my suspicions about one Reverend.
parliamentarian who thought the answer to the problem was to
come up with his own set of guidelines for the A. B. C.
I have never made any secret of my great admiration for
a former Labor Prime Minister, John Curtin. In talking about the
I find again that on this, as on so many other subjects,
what he had to say made profound sense. It is worth quoting
at some length a statement he made on 12 April 1945. He said
then:-" The Government recognises that the intent of the
Australian Broadcasting Act is to create a position
of special independence of judgment and action for
the national broadcasting instrumentality. This is
inevitably the case because of its highly delicate
function in broadcasting at public expense news
statements and discussions which are potent influences
on public opinion and attitudes. As the legislation
provides, this peculiar function calls for an undoubted
measure of independence for the controlling body of
the national broadcasting instrumentality which cannot
be measured by the constitution of other semi-governmental
boards or agencies which do not impinge on the tender
and dangerous realms of moral, religious, aesthetic
and political values. In the last resort, the healthy
and beneficent functions of national broadcasting
and the maintenance of public confidence in the system
must rest, in all matters touching these values, solely
on the integrity and independent judgment of the persons
chosen to determine and administer its policy, and not
on either review by, or pressure from, any sources
outside it, political or non-political. This principle
holds good in spite of the necessary responsibility of
the Commission to Parliament through the Minister, for
the legitimate use of its funds under the terms of the
Act, and all the sections of the Act should be read in
the light of the above general intent of Parliament to
the establishment of the Commission." / 4 
4
Those principles hold good today. Those principles,
after a period of questionable activity, are being applied
again today. I can affirm from this platform that, since it
came into office sixteen months ago, the present government
has not sought to interfere with A. B. C. programs. I can affirm
that, in that time, we have not sought to suppress any program
or determine its contents. Indeed, I can point to one major
instance where the present government has created the opportunity
for fuller debate of public issues. It has been the practice
of Prime Ministers to make occasional broadcasts to the nation
about major matters of public interest. Inevitably those
broadcasts have involved at times statements which the Parties
opposed to those Prime Ministers would dispute vigorously.
When I was Leader of the Opposition, I never had the opportunity
to gain a similar forum for the statement of contrary views.
The present Leader of the Opposition has such a forum. In
the last sixteen months the A. B. C. has acceded to every request
he has made for the right to reply to any Report to the Nation
which I have delivered.
I talked earlier about the need for durability of
basic principles, even at a time of modernisation. My Government
is firmly committed to those principles of independence and
freedom from political interference. We have sogght to maintain
and enhance them for the A. B. C. since we came into office.
It is our hope that we will establish such a strong precedent in
this way that no future government will dare to deny them, that
no future government will dare to belittle the competence and
judgment of honest men or worse, to seek to drive them from the
organisation. 



1II
THE SENATE v THE PEOPLE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME IINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM.,
TO THE LABOR WOMEN'S CONIFERENCE OF THE A. L. P.,
TRADES HALL, SYDNEY,
SUNDAY 31 MARCH 1974
THE SENATE ELECTION ON 18 MAY WILL BE THE FIFTH
SENATE ELECTION SINCE I HAVE BEEN LEADER OR DEPUTY LEADER
OF THE PARTY; IT WILL BE THE EIGHTH SENATE ELECTION,
AND THE ELEVENTH ELECTION FOR EITHER HOUSE, SINCE I
BECAME A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT. I HOPE YOU WILL NOT
THINK IT MERE GALLANTRY ON MY PART IF I CLAIM TO HAVE
A LONGER MEMORY OF POLITICAL EVENTS THAN MOST OF THE
LADIES IN THIS ROOM. THE FACT IS THAT I CANNOT RECALL
A MORE IMPORTANT SENATE ELECTION THAN THE ONE WE FACE NOW.
THE ISSUES AT STAKE, THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PARLIAMENT,
FOR THE PEOPLE, FOR DEMOCRACY ITSELF, WILL BE CRUCIAL
AND FAR-REACHING, FOR THE FIRST TIME, AND PERHAPS FOR
THE ONLY TIME, WE WILL BE FIGHTING A SENATE CAMPAIGN
OF GENUINE AND HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE. 
-2-
I SAY THIS NOT MERELY BECAUSE OF THE REFERENDUMS
TO BE HELD WITH THE SENATE ELECTION, IMPORTANT AS THESE
REFERENDUMS ARE. CERTAINLY THEY WILL GIVE AN ADDED
MEANING, AN ADDED DIMENSION, AN ADDED ZEST TO OUR
CAMPAIGN. RATHERj I BASE MY CLAIM ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE
OF THIS ELECTION ON THE UNIQUE AND SPECIAL CHARACTER
OF THE ISSUES OR RATHER, THE CENTRAL ISSUE.
THIS WILL BE A CAMPAIGN, NOT JUST FOR THE SENATE,
BUT ABOUT THE SENATE. THE PEOPLE WILL BE PASSING
JUDGMENT ON THE ROLE, THE RECORD AND THE RELEVANCE
OF THE SENATE ITSELF. THEY WILL BE PASSING JUDGMENT
ON THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE AND THE RECORD AND
MOTIVES AND CREDIBILITY OF THE OPPOSITION AS A WHOLE-FOR
MAKE NO MISTAKE, THIS WILL BE VERY MUCH AN ELECTION ABOUT
THE OPPOSITION, IT IS THE OPPOSITION WHOSE PERFORMANCE
IS IN QUESTION. IT IS THE OPPOSITION WHOSE GOOD FAITH
AND EFFECTIVENESS WE MUST EXAMINE. IS IT UNITED?
IS IT BELIEVABLE? DOES IT SPEAK WITH ONE VOICE?
IS IT MOTIVATED BY CONCERN FOR THE NATIONAL INTEREST
OR MERELY BY SPITE, BY RESENTMENT AND A LUST TO RETURN
TO POWER? THE RECORD OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THIS ELECTION
WILL BE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE; THE RECORD OF THE OPPOSITION
AND THE RECORD OF THE SENATE WILL BE OF SUPREME
IMPORTANCE, IT IS THAT RECORD THAT I WANT TO EXAMINE
TODAY. IT IS A PATHETIC AND CONTEMPTIBLE RECORD;
IT IS A PATHETIC AND CONTEMPTIBLE OPPOSITION,
e p ,/ 3 
-3-
IN DECEMBER 1972 SIXTEEN MONTHS AGO THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ELECTED A LABOR GOVERNMENT WITH A
DECISIVE MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
THE POLICIES ON WHICH THE GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED HAD BEEN
CLEARLY STATED, THEY HAD BEEN FORMULATED OVER MANY
YEARS IN THE PUBLIC DECISION-MAKING FORUMS OF THE PARTY,
MOST OF THOSE POLICIES WERE PUT TO THE PEOPLE NOT ONCE,
BUT TWICE, IN THE ELECTIONS OF 1969 THERE WAS A SWING
OF MORE THAN 6% TO THE LABOR PARTY, IN 1972, WHEN A
SIMILAR PROGRAM WAS SUBMITTED TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
THERE WAS A FURTHER SWING TO LABOR OF THE ORDER OF 2,7,%
THOSE TWO ELECTIONS SAW AN EMPHATIC AND RE-ITERATED EXPRESSION
OF PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN THE POLICIES OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT,
IN THE MONTHS SINCE THE LAST ELECTION THE GOVERNMENT
HAS ACTED WITH ALL POSSIBLE SPEED TO IMPLEMENT THE
POLICIES FOR WHICH THE PEOPLE VOTED,
WE HAVE MADE GREAT PROGRESS TOWARDS A MORE JUST,
MORE PROSPEROUS AND MORE HUMANE SOCIETY, MUCH OF OUR
PROGRAM HAS BEEN IMPLEMENTED,. IWE HAVE DONE MANY
THINGS THAT WE PROMISED TO DO; WE HAVE DONE NOTHING THAT
WE DID NOT PROMISE TO-DO, IT IS TRUE THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
UNFORESEEN FRUSTRATIONS AND UNPREDICTABLE DISTRACTIONS;
BUT FOR THE MOST PART ACTING WITH GOOD FAITH, ACTING
WITH DETERMINATION AND VIGOR, BY SHEER HARD WORK AND
A VOLUME OF PARLIAMENTARY BUSINESS THAT SURPASSES ALL
RECORDS WE HAVE SOUGHT TO DISCHARGE IN FULL MEASURE
THE TRUST PLACED UPON US BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, a / 4 
4
FOR ALL OUR ACTIVITY, FOR ALL OUR DETERMINATION
TO GIVE EFFECT TO THE PEOPLE'S WILL, THERE ARE GREAT
AND IMPORTANT THINGS WE HAVE BEEN PREVENTED FROM DOING,
THE SENATE HAS BLOCKED AND DELAYED, AMENDED AND
FRUSTRATED SIGNIFICANT PARTS OF OUR PROGRAM,
NOW THERE ARE TWO THINGS ABOUT THE SENATE
THAT I ASK YOU TO REMEMBER. THE FIRST IS THAT NO PARTY
HAS A MAJORITY IN THE SENATE, iJO PARTY, AS THE SENATE
NOW STANDS, CAN CLAIM A MANDATE IN THAT CHAMBER,
IT IS TRUE THAT THE COMBINED NON-LABOR PARTIES
THAT CURIOUS COLLECTION OF FRUSTRATED LIBERALS,
COUNTRY PARTY BACKWOODSMEN, SPLINTER GROUPS AND
DISAFFECTED INDEPENDENTS WHO SUPPORT THEM
CAN MUSTER A MAJORITY; OF COURSE THEY CAN,
BUT IT IS MEANINGLESS TO SUGGEST THAT THIS CONSTITUTES
AN OPPOSITION MAJORITY IN THE TRUE SENSE, OR THAT ANY
MANDATE EXISTS FOR A POLICY OF OBSTRUCTION. 
AND THAT BRINGS ME TO THE SECOND ESSENTIAL
FACT ABOUT THE SENATE AS IT STANDS, THE SENATORS WHO
HAVE BLOCKED AND FRUSTRATED THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM
WERE ELECTED YEARS BEFORE THE GOVERNMENT IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, HALF OF THEM WERE ELECTED IN
DECEMBER 1967; THE REST OF THEM WERE ELECTED IN
DECEMBER 1970, TRULY THEY ARE VOICES FROM THE PAST;
TRULY THEY ARE YESTERDAY'S MEN, YET THESE SENATORS,
SOME OF THEM ELECTED U YEARS AGO, PRESUME TO SIT IN
JUDGMENT ON A GOVERNMENT WHOSE POLICIES HAVE BEEN
TWICE ENDORSED BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WITHIN THE
PAST 42 YEARS, I CAN THINK OFNO MORE FLAGRANT
ANACHRONISM THAT THIS, I CAN THINK OF NOTHING THAT
MAKES A GREATER MOCKERY OF A SUPPOSEDLY DEMOCRATIC
LEGISLATURE, 
-6-
I HAVE SAID THAT THE PERFORMANCE AND
CAPACITY OF THE OPPOSITION IS CENTRAL TO THIS
SENATE CAMPAIGN, SIXTEEN MONTHS AGO THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE PASSED JUDGMENT ON OUR OPPONENTS AS A GOVERNMENT;
ON 18 MAY THEY WILL HAVE THEIR FIRST OPPORTUNITY TO
JUDGE THEM AS AN OPPOSITION, I MUST SAY THE PROSPECT
IS A DAUNTING ONE, FOR THE LIFE OF ME I CAN'T DECIDE
WHETHER THEY ARE WORSE IN OPPOSITION OR WORSE IN
GOVERNMENT. AT LEAST THEY CAN'T DO AS MUCH HARM
IN OPPOSITION, IN GOVERNMENT THEY ARE EXPERT IN
DAMAGING THE COUNTRY, BUT IN OPPOSITION THEY HAVE
A POSITIVE GENIUS FOR DAMAGING THEMSELVES,
ON BALANCE I THINK I PREFER THE LATTER, ,/ 7 
-7-
I KNOW SOME OF YOU MUST BE AS CONFUSED AS I
AM ABOUT RECENT EVENTS IN THE OPPOSITION PARTIES,
THE FACT IS THAT WE HAVE NEVER HAD A MORE CONFUSED,
MORE DIVIDED, MORE DISCREDITED OR MORE DEBILITATED
OPPOSITION THAN WE HAVE NOW, I THINK WE CAN BEST
APPROACH THEIR PROBLEMS ON A STATE BY STATE BASIS
THAT IS A GOOD SENATE PRINCIPLE, AFTER ALL BUT
THERE ARE ONE OR TWO GENERAL QUESTIONS TO CLEAR UP
FIRST, FOR EXAMPLE, WHICH PARTIES BELONG TO THE
OPPOSITION AND WHICH DO NOT? I AM NOT CLEAR WHETHER
THE DLP BELONGS TO THE OPPOSITION, MR ANTHONY
APPARENTLY THINKS IT DOES, BUT SIR CHARLES CUTLER
IN NEW SOUTH WALES THINKS THE DLP IS FINISHED,
NEVERTHELESS, THE DLP HAS MERGED WITH THE COUNTRY
PARTY IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND QUEENSLAND, AND WHAT
IS THE POSITION OF THE AUSTRALIA PARTY, WHICH MR SNEDDEN
HAS INVITED TO JOIN FORCES WITH THE LIBERALS?
OF COURSE IT WAS AN EXCELLENT IDEA AND IT WAS WELL
RECEIVED BY EVERYONE IN THE LIBERAL PARTY EXCEPT
MR MALCOLM FRASER, MR FRASER DECLARED THAT THE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIA PARTY AND LIBERAL
PARTY WERE " TOTALLY UNBRIDGEABLE". SENATOR
HANNAN SEEMS TO THINK THAT THE DIFFERENCES IN THE
LIBERAL PARTY ARE ALSO TOTALLY UNBRIDGEABLE, I,/ 8 
0
SENATOR HANNAN HAS FORMED HIS OWN PARTY TO GET RID OF
THE TRENDIES IN VICTORIA, AND FIR STEELE HALL HAS FORMED
HIS OWN PARTY TO ATTRACT MORE TRENDIES IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
I AM STILL NOT SURE WHETHER LIBERAL VOTERS IN QUEENSLAND
WILL BE VOTING FOR THEIR OWN SENATE TEAM OR FOR A JOINT
TICKET WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY OR IS IT THE INATIONAL
COUNTRY PARTY? OR THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE, AS THEY CALL
IT IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA?
I MUST SAY THERE ARE SERIOUS DILEMMAS FOR
OPPOSITION SUPPORTERS IN THIS SITUATION; IF THE DLP
MATES WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY AND THE AUSTRALIA PARTY
MATES WITH THE LIBERALS AND THE LIBERALS MATE WITH THE
COUNTRY PARTY, DOES THIS MEAN THAT THE DLP HAS MERGED
WITH THE AUSTRALIA PARTY? DOES SENATOR HANNAN SUPPORT
THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE? DOES GORDON BARTON GIVE HIS
PREFERENCES TO THE IIATIONAL LIBERAL PARTY? DOES
MALCOLM FRASER SUPPORT STEELE HALL? DOES THE DLP GIVE
ITS PREFERENCE TO CUTLER OR COURT CHARLES THE FIRST
OR CHARLES THE SECOND? IT MAY SIMPLIFY MATTERS IF I
LIST ALL THE OPPOSITION PARTIES, NOT NECESSARILY IN ORDER
OF IMPORTANCE. AT LAST COUNT WE HAD THE LIBERAL PARTY,
THE COUNTRY PARTY, THE LIBERAL COUNTRY LEAGUE, THE
NATIONAL COUNTRY PARTY, THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE, THE
NATIONAL LIBERAL PARTY, THE DLP, THE AUSTRALIA PARTY
AND THE STEELE HALL PARTY, I HEARD MR ANTHONY SAY THE
OTHER DAY THAT HE WANTED A SINGLE ANTI-SOCIALIST ALLIANCE
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. I CAN ONLY SAY THAT AT THE RATE
THINGS ARE GOING, WE'LL SOON HAVE MORE ANTI-SOCIALIST
PARTIES THAN ANTI-SOCIALIST SENATORS. / 9 
DOES ANYONE SERIOUSLY SUGGEST THAT THIS
SQUABBLING COLLECTION OF BITTER AND DISAPPOINTED MEN,
THESE BRAWLERS AND BACKBITERSi TRENDIES AND NON-TRENDIES,
PHONY PROGRESSIVES AND UNREPENTANT REACTIONARIES, HAVE
ANY CLAIM TO THE CONFIDENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE?
WHO SPEAKS FOR THE OPPOSITION? WHO LEADS THE OPPOSITION?
YOUR GUESS IS AS GOOD AS MINE. JUDGING FROM THE PRESS
IN RECENT WEEKS, THEIR MOST PROLIFIC AND CONSISTENT
PROPAGANDIST IS SIR ROBERT M'ENZIES. ONLY LAST WEEK
PlR fICMAHON WAS-LAMENTING IN THE PRESS THAT HE WISHED
HIS PARTY HAD DONE AS MUCH FOR EDUCATION AS WE HAVE.
NIOT LONG AGO HE SAID IT WAS A GREAT PITY THAT HIS
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT ABOLISHED CONSCRIPTION AND SET UP
THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION. I REMIND YOU THAT
WHEN THE LEGISLATION FOR THAT COMMISSION WAS BEFORE THE
PARLIAMENT THE LIBERALS SUPPORTED IT WHILE THEIR SO-CALLED
ALLIES IN THE COUNTRY PARTY OPPOSED IT. AND IF YOU TAKE
THAT OTHER GREAT LANDMARK IN THE GOVERNMENT' S FIRST YEAR
OF OFFICE OUR ADDITIONAL GRANTS TO SCHOOLS IT
WAS THE COUNTRY PARTY THAT SUPPORTED IT WHILE THE LIBERALS
VOTED AGAINST IT. WHAT UNITY! WHAT A COALITION!
WHAT A COMMENTARY ON AN OPPOSITION THAT IN 16 MONTHS
HAS PRODUCED NOT A SINGLE NEW POLICY, NOT A SINGLE FRESH
AND CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA. VIE ALL KNOW WHAT 111R SNEDDEN
IS AGAINST[ HE IS AGAINST EVERYTHING.. BUT WHAT IS
MR SNEDDEN M~? / lo 
10
HE'S FOR REDUCED GOVERNMENT'SPENDING, BUT WHAT
GOVERNMENT SPENDING DOES HE WANT TO REDUCE?
HE DOESN'T SAY. HE SIMPLY WANTS US TO SPEND MORE
ON DEFENCE, MORE ON UNNECESSARY SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTIES,
MORE ON PRIVATE SCHOOLS THAT ARE ALREADY WELL OFF,
THE CONSISTENT THEME OF THE OPPOSITION IS A NEGATIVE
THEME. THE CONSISTENT VOICE OF THE OPPOSITION IS A
WHINGER'S VOICE. THEY ARE A PARTY OF NARKS AND KNOCKERS
AGAINST EVERYTHING AND IN FAVOUR OF NOTHING.
I BELIEVE THERE IS A CLEAR REASON FOR THE CHRONIC
DISUNITY AND DISARRAY IN THE OPPOSITION PARTIES. AND IT
IS THIS: THEY HAVE NOT ACCEPTED THE FACT OF THEIR DEFEAT.
THEY GO ON BELIEVING THAT THE VERDICT OF THE PEOPLE IN
DECEMBER 1972 WAS A TEMPORARY ABERRATION; THAT SOONER
OR LATER NO MATTER HOW DIVIDED THEIR RANKS, HOW BARREN
THEIR IDEAS, HOW MUDDLED THEIR POLICIES ON BASIC ISSUES
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WILL RETURN THEM TO OFFICE. THEY
HAVE A DEEP CONTEMPT, NOT ONLY FOR THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE,
BUT FOR THE GOOD SENSE OF THE PEOPLE. THEY BELIEVE THEY
CAN FLOUT THE CLEARLY EXPRESSED WISH OF THE ELECTORATE FOR
A PROGRAM OF ORDERED CHANGE AND SOCIAL REFORM, FOR
ENLIGHTENED POLICIES TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOURS, FOR SOCIAL
JUSTICE AT HOME AND MORE MATURE AND INDEPENDENT POLICIES
ABROAD, ,/ 11 
11-
THE SENATE HAS BEEN'THE GREAT INSTRUMENT
FOR THIS CAMPAIGN OF OBSTRUCTION. SINCE WE TOOK OFFICE
THE SENATE HAS REJECTED 15 BILLS, DEFERRED ANOTHER
AND AMENDED 21, I LIST THE 15 BILLS THEY HAVE
REJECTED:
COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL TWO BILLS;
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION;
REPRESENTATION TWO BILLS;
LAND ACQUISITION ( AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY);
SEAS AND SUBMERGED LANDS ( ROYALTY ON MINERALS);
HEALTH INSURANCE;
HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION;
AND, FOUR CONSTITUTION ALTERATION BILLS.
IT IS NOT DIFFICULT TO FIND A COMMON THEME IN THEIR
OBSTRUCTIVE TACTICS. THE OPPOSITION MAY LACK A COMMON
VOICE BUT IT HAS NEVER LACKED A COMMON CAUSE; AND THAT
CAUSE IS THE DEFENCE OF VESTED INTERESTS. ,/ 12 
12-
IN DEFENCE OF THESE VESTED INTERESTS THEY
REJECTED THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL ELECTORATES,
THEY COMPLAIN ABOUT INDUSTRIAL UNREST IN THE COMMUNITY,
YET THEY BLOCKED OUR ATTEMPTS TO MODERNISE AND
DEMOCRATISE THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT AND PROMOTE THE
CONDITIONS FOR GENUINE INDUSTRIAL STABILITY, THEY
SOUGHT TO DENY REPRESENTATION IN THE SENATE TO THE
PEOPLE OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY; THEY SOUGHT TO DENY TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS TO NATIONAL REVENUES AND BORROWINGS,:
THEY PRESERVED FOR FOREIGN MINING INTERESTS THE RIGHT
TO EXPLOIT OUR OFF-SHORE RESOURCES; THEY FOUGIIT TO
PRESERVE THE INEQUITY AND INEFFICIENCY OF AN ANTIQUATED
HEALTH SERVICE, BY SHELVING THE TRADE PRACTICES BILL
THEY LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO MONOPOLIES AND CARTELS TO FIX
PRICES, ORGANISE CARTELS AND EXPLOIT THE AUSTRALIAN
CONSUMER, BY SHELVING THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL THEY BLOCKED THE MOST
EFFECTIVE INSTRUMENT FOR ENSURING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF
OUR INDUSTRIES AND DEVELOPING NEW INDUSTRIES, THEY HAVE
LEFT THE DOOR OPEN TO FOREIGN TAKEOVERS AND FOREIGN
CONTROL OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, YET FOR ALL THE
LEGISLATION I HAVE MENTIONED THE GOVERNMENT HAD A
CLEAR MANDATE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, 
13
DESPITE THE EFFORTS OF THE SENATE TO OBSTRUCT
OUR REFORMS, THERE IS ONE AREA IN WHICH THEY ARE POWERLESS,
THEY HAVE BEEN UNABLE TO PREVENT US PUTTING OUR REFERENDUM
PROPOSALS TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AT THE SAME TIME AS
THE SENATE ELECTIONS, THIS WAS NOT FOR WANT OF TRYING,
THE SENATE WAS DETERMINED THAT WHATEVER THE SENATE MIGHT
THINK OF OUR REFERENDUMS, THE PEOPLE WOULD BE DENIED
AN OPPORTUNITY TO DECIDE THE ISSUES FOR THEMSELVES,
THE CONSTITUTION, HOWEVER, ENABLES REFERENDUMS TO BE
PUT TO THE PEOPLE EVEN IF THE SENATE OBSTRUCTS THEM.
THAT IS WHAT WE ARE DOING, OUR REFERENDUMS ARE
DESIGNED TO GIVE A NEW DEAL TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
TO ENTRENCH IN THE CONSTITUTION THE BASIC DEMOCRATIC
RIGHTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, I SUMMARIZE WHAT
OUR PROPOSALS SEEK TO ACHIEVE:
1. i, To ENTRENCH THE RIGHT TO VOTE FOR ALL
ADULT CITIZENS IN BOTH STATE AND AUSTRALIAN
ELECTIONS,
2, To ESTABLISH THE DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE FOR
BOTH THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE PARLIAMENTS
THAT MEMBERS SHOULD REPRESENT EQUAL NUMBERS
OF PEOPLE,
3, To ENSURE THAT STATE UPPER HOUSES ARE ELECTED
DIRECTLY BY THE PEOPLE, / 14 
1' 4
4. TO GRANT CITIZENS IN THE l'IlORTHERN TERRITORY
AND THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY THE
RIGHT TO VOTE IN REFERENDUMS.
TO ENSURE THAT THE PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA
REFLECTS THE POPULAR WILL AT THE TIME-THAT THE
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA DETERMINE THEIR GOVERNMENT,
THE SECOND BROAD OBJECTIVE OF OUR REFERENDUM
PROPOSALS IS TO BALANCE THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES. OF
THE THREE LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. THREE FURTHER PROPOSALS
WILL REMOVE CONSTITUTIONAL OBSTACLES TO THE RATIONAL
CO-ORDINATION OF INTERGOVERNMENT RELATIONS.
THEY WILL ENABLE US:-
1. TO FACILITATE THE REFERENCE OF LEGISLATIVE
POWERS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO THE
STATES AND VICE VERSA IF BOTH-AGREE THAT THE
OTHER LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT WOULD EXERCISE
THOSE POWERS MORE EFFECTIVELY.
2. TO ENHANCE THE ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT BY
EXTENDING THE PROVISIONS IN THE CONSTITUTION
WHICH GOVERN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT' S
RELATIONSHIP WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AS WELL.
3. To INVOLVE THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE MORE CLOSELY
IN DETERMINING THE BALANCE OF FUNCTIONS BY
FACILITATING ALTERATIONS TO THE CONSTITUTION. 
15
NOW TWO OF THESE PROPOSALS THE ONE FOR SIMULTANEOUS
ELECTIONS OF THE SENATE AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND THE ONE FACILITATING AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
WERE RECOMMENDED 1C YEARS AGO IN THE REPORT OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW COMMITTEE SET UP UNDER SIR ROBERT
MENZIES. THEY COULD HAVE BEEN PUT TO THE PEOPLE
AND THEY SHOULD HAVE BEEN PUT TO THE PEOPLE AT ANY
TIME SINCE THEN. THE PROPOSAL TO FACILITATE AMENDMENTS
TO THE CONSTITUTION WAS CLEARLY EXPLAINED IN THE REVIEW
COMMITTEE'S REPORT IN THESE TERMS:
A CLEAR MAJORITY OF THE ELECTORS WHO
VOTE AT A REFERENDUM ARE IN FAVOUR OF A PROPOSED
LAW, THEIR WILL SHOULD NOT BE FRUSTRATED BECAUSE
SEPARATE MAJORITIES OF ELECTORS HAVE NOT BEEN
OBTAINED IN A MAJORITY OF THE STATES, IT IS,
IN THE COMMITTEE'S OPINION, MORE IN ACCORD
WITH DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLE AND THE DEVELOPMENTS
SINCE FEDERATION THAT IT SHOULD BE SUFFICIENT
TO OBTAIN SEPARATE MAJORITIES IN AT LEAST ONE
HALF OF THE NUMBER OF STATES': / 1G 
1G
THAT IS THE PURPOSE OF OUR REFERENDUM.
INSTEAD OF REQUIRING A MAJORITY IN FOUR STATES OUT
OF SIX, A MAJORITY OF ALL THE PEOPLE. THE TWO THIRDS
MAJORITY IS UNREASONABLY HIGH. IN THE WORDS OF THE
CONSTITUTION REVIEW COMMITTEE, IT MEANS THAT
" FOR EVERY STATE IN WHICH THERE IS AN ADVERSE VOTE
THERE MUST BE A FAVOURABLE VOTE IN TWO STATES
A CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE HAS TO BE SUPPORTED NOT
ONLY BY A MAJORITY OF STATES BUT BY TWO THIRDS
OF THE STATES."' / 17 
17-
OUR REFERENDUM ON EQUAL ELECTORATES THAT IS,
ELECTORATES HAVING THE SAME NUMBER OF PEOPLE RESULTS
FROM THE SENATE'S FAILURE LAST YEAR TO PASS OUR
LEGISLATION FOR ELECTORAL REFORM, THE SENATE TWICE
REJECTED OUR BILL TO REDUCE THE PRESENT DISPARITY
IN THE SIZE OF ELECTORATES, HIAD THIS LEGISLATION BEEN
PASSED OUR REFERENDUM WOULD NOT BE NECESSARY,
IN THE SAME WAY, IF THE PREMIERS LAST YEAR HAD ACCEPTED
OUR PROPOSAL TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT DIRECT ACCESS
TO THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF THE NATION, OUR
REFERENDUM ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD NOT BE NECESSARY,
EVERY ONE OF OUR REFERENDUM PROPOSALS IS A CONSEQUENCE
OF THE FAILURE OF THE STATES OR THE SENATE TO AGREE
TO MEASURES FOR WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAD A MANDATE,
OR THE FAILURE OF OUR PREDECESSORS TO PUT REFORMS
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WHICH WERE APPROVED IG YEARS
AGO BY AN ALL-PARTY COMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION, / 1I; 
1
So LET ME SUMMARISE THE ISSUES AT STAKE ON
18 MAY, THEY ARE CLEAR AND SIMPLE ISSUES AND THEY
INVOLVE QUITE BASIC QUESTIONS OF DEMOCRACY, HAS THE
SENATE THE RIGHT TO OBSTRUCT A PROGRAM CLEARLY ENDORSED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE? CLEARLY IT HAS NOT,
SHOULD A SENATE ELECTED IN 1967 AND 1970 BE ALLOWED TO
OBSTRUCT A GOVERNMENT ELECTED IN 1972? CLEARLY IT SHOULD NOT,
SHOULD AN OPPOSITION GUILTY OF THIS OBSTRUCTION
AN OPPOSITION BEREFT OF LEADERSHIP AND DEVOID OF PURPOSE
BE ENCOURAGED TO PURSUE ITS OBSTRUCTIONIST TACTICS
FURTHER? IT SHOULD NOT, SHOULD A SENATE THAT
HAS DONE ITS BEST TO PREVENT THE PEOPLE DECIDING
BASIC QUESTIONS OF DEMOCRACY BE ENTITLED TO THE
PEOPLE'S CONFIDENCE? IT SHOULD NOT, / 19 
19
THESE ARE NOT ACADEMIC OR TECHNICAL QUESTIONS,
THEY AFFECT THE ESSENTIAL RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE
AND THE PEOPLE ON 18 MAY WILL BE ABLE TO DECIDE THEM,
I LOOK FORWARD TO THIS CAMPAIGN, PERHAPS, LIKE ME,
YOU HAVE FOUND SENATE ELECTIONS IN THE PAST SOMEWHAT
ARID AND POINTLESS AFFAIRS, THE REASON HAS BEEN
THAT NO CRUCIAL ISSUES WERE INVOLVED; NO GOVERNMENT'S
FUTURE WAS AT STAKE; NO BROAD POLITICAL PRINCIPLE
WAS TO BE RESOLVED, ON 13 MAY THE REAL ISSUE,
THE REAL PRINCIPLE, WILL BE UNMISTAKABLE, IT IS
WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS COUNTRY IS TO BE
RESPONSIBLE TO THE PEOPLE WHO ELECTED IT, OR
WHETHER IT IS* TO REMAIN AT THE MERCY OF A SENATE
ELECTED YEARS BEFORE, AND DOMINATED BY THOSE
WHO HAVE FORFEITED ALL CLAIM TO BE A UNITED AND
CREDIBLE OPPOSITION. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,#
THE [ ION, E. G. WHITLAV1, M. Pe.,
TO THE 43RD CONFERENCE OF THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL TEXTILE ORGANISATION,
SOUTHERN CROSS HOTEL, MELBOURNE,
MONDAY, 1 APRIL 1974
I AM DELIGHTED THAT AUSTRALIA IS HOST FOR
THE FIRST TIME TO A MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL
TEXTILE ORGANISATION. IN AN INDUSTRY RENOWNED FOR
ITS INTERNATIONAL LINKS AND ORGANISATIONS INDEEDI
CAN THINK OF NO INDUSTRY THAT SURPASSES YOURS IN
THIS RESPECT THE I. W. T. O. IS THE LARGEST AND MOST
IMPORTANT ORGANISATION OF WOOL TRADERS, PROCESSORS
AND TEXTILE MANUFACTURERS IN THE WORLD. YOU REPRESENT
26 NATIONS IN EVERY HEMISPHERE, IN EVERY CONTINENT.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT AUSTRALIA, AS THE WORLD'S
LARGEST PRODUCER OF WOOL, SHOULD BE THE VENUE FOR
YOUR CONFERENCE. YOUR ORGANISATION HAS BEEN IN
EXISTENCE FOR NEARLY HALF A CENTURY, YET IT WAS ONLY
IN THE LATE 1950' S THAT AUSTRALIA BECAME A FIRM MEMBER.
SO WE HAVE NORMALIZED OUR RELATIONS WITH THE I. W. T. O.
I AM GLAD WE HAVE; AND IF I MAY SAY SO, IT IS HIGH
TIME YOU WERE HERE AS OUR GUESTS, ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT I WELCOME YOU ALL MOST CORDIALLY. 
-2-
THERE IS ANOTHER REASON WHY THIS CONFERENCE
SHOULD BRING SPECIAL SATISFACTION TO THE WOOL INDUSTRY IN
AUSTRALIA, NOTHING COULD SYMBOLIZE MORE VIVIDLY THE VITALITY
AND RESILIENCE OF THIS GREAT INDUSTRY IN ALL ITS PHASES,
PRODUCTION, MANUFACTURING AND MARKETING, I HARDLY NEED
REMIND YOU OF THE GLOOM AND FOREBODING IN THE AUSTRALIAN
WOOL INDUSTRY ONLY TWO OR THREE YEARS AGO, MANY WOOLGROWERS
WERE LEAVING THE LAND, MANY OF THE HISTORIC NAMES, PLACES
AND COMPANIES IN THE INDUSTRY WERE IN JEOPARDY, DECLINING
PRICES, COMBINED WITH THE EVER-PRESENT HAZARD OF DROUGHT,
WERE TAKING THEIR TOLL, TODAY THE PROSPECTS ARE MUCH
BRIGHTER; THE INDUSTRY HAS RECOVERED ITS TRADITIONAL
CONFIDENCE, I BELIEVE YOUR CONFERENCE WILL REFLECT AND
STIMULATE THE NEW MOOD OF BUOYANCY AND OPTIMISM IN THE
INDUSTRY, IT WILL REMIND US THAT NATURAL WOOL REMAINS THE
SUPREME FIBRE, AND WHATEVER THE PROBLEMS AND FLUCTUATIONS
YOUR INDUSTRY MUST FACE, ITS UNDERLYING STRENGTH IS BEYOND
QUESTION. P/ 3 
-3-
You ARE ALL AWARE OF THE SUPREME IMPORTANCE
OF WOOL IN THE HISTORY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF THIS
COUNTRY, DESPITE A GREATER DIVERSITY IN AUSTRALIA'S EXPORTS
AND A GREATER DIVERSITY OF PRODUCTION WITHIN PRIMARY INDUSTRY
ITSELF, WOOL STILL HOLDS ITS PLACE AS A COMMODITY OF
ENORMOUS IMPORTANCE, ALTHOUGH SHEEP NUMBERS HAVE DECLINED
MARKEDLY IN RECENT YEARS, AUSTRALIA PRODUCES ABOUT ONE-THIRD
OF ALL THE WORLD'S WOOL AND ABOUT HALF OF THE SUPPLIES
ENTERING WORLD TRADE, OUR OWN WOOL TEXTILE INDUSTRY IS
OF CONSIDERABLE SIGNIFICANCE, THEWOOL YARN AND
BROADWOVEN FABRIC INDUSTRY PRODUCES GOODS WORTH $ 129 MILLION
A YEAR AND EMPLOYS MORE THAN 12,000 PEOPLE, NEVERTHELESS,
ABOUT 90% OF OUR WOOL IS EXPORTED, CLEARLY WE HAVE A
VITAL INTEREST IN THE PROSPERITY OF THE WOOL TEXTILE
INDUSTRY OVERSEAS, WOOL PRODUCERS AND WOOL USERS HAVE A
COMMON INTEREST, THEY HAVE THE SAME ULTIMATE CONCERN FOR
THE SUPREMACY OF THEIR BASIC RAW MATERIAL AND THE GROWTH
OF WORLD MARKETS, I BELIEVE THIS CONFERENCE WILL GIVE
ALL OF US SUPPLIERS, PROCESSORS, MANUFACTURERS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR DIRECT AND VALUABLE PERSONAL CONTACTS
WHICH WILL BENEFIT THE INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE, / 4 
-4-
WHAT I FIND ENCOURAGING IN THE AIMS AND
FUNCTIONS OF YOUR ORGANISATION IS THE EMPHASIS YOU GIVE
TO ORDERLY MARKETING, YOU SEEK TO BRING A PLANNED AND
RATIONAL APPROACH TO THE WORLD TRADE IN WOOL, YOU
PROVIDE A COMMON MEETING POINT FOR COMMERCIAL WOOL
INTERESTS AND ENCOURAGE UNIFORM COMMERCIAL PRACTICES
IN THE WOOL TRADE, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SHARES
THOSE AMBITIONS AND APPLAUDS THEM, WE RECOGNISE
YOUR NATURAL INTEREST IN THE WAY RAW WOOL IS MARKETED
HERE IN AUSTRALIA, FOR THAT REASON WE HAVE MADE USE
OF MEETINGS OF YOUR ORGANISATION TO EXPLAIN THE GOVERNMENT'S
WOOL RESERVE PRICE POLICY TO THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL TRADE,
WE INTEND ALSO, AS YOU KNOW, TO ESTABLISH A NATIONAL
AUSTRALIAN WOOL STANDARDS MONITORING UNIT; AND THE
VALUE AND PURPOSE OF THAT UNIT HAS BEEN EXPLAINED AT
SESSIONS OF YOUR ORGANISATION, 
IT WILL HELP YOU IF I SAY SOMETHING MORE ABOUT
OUR PLANS FOR WOOL MARKETING IN AUSTRALIA, FOR YEARS THE
WOOL INDUSTRY HAS BEEN SUBJECT TO FLUCTUATING MARKETS AND
UNCERTAIN PRICES, OUR PREDECESSORS REQUESTED THE
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION TO REPORT ON THE WOOL
MARKETING SYSTEM, WE RECEIVED THEIR REPORT IN FEBRUARY
AND IMMEDIATELY'MADE IT PUBLIC, THE OPPORTUNITY NOW
EXISTS FOR A FULL AND OPEN PUBLIC DISCUSSION OF THE
REPORT BY ALL INTERESTED PARTIES, BRIEFLY, AS MANY OF
YOU WILL KNOW, THE REPORT RECOMMENDED THAT THE. lWOOL
CORPORATION ACQUIRE ALL EXPORT WOOL AND SELL IT IN
THE WAY IT THINKS BEST EITHER AT AUCTION OR UNDER
CONTRACT; THAT THE CORPORATION HAVE POWER TO ALLOCATE
AMOUNTS OF WOOL TO BE SOLD; AND THAT IT SHOULD STABILIZE
THE PRICE OF WOOL BY ESTABLISHING A FLOOR PRICE OR EVEN
A CEILING PRICE WHERE NECESSARY, THESE RECOMMENDATIONS
ARE BROADLY CONSISTENT WITH THE POLICY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, WHICH STATES THAT THE WOOL
CORPORATION " WILL BE EMPOWERED TO ACQUIRE AND/ OR
MARKET THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL CLIP," 
-6-
THE CORPORATION'S REPORT IS NATURALLY A
CONTROVERSIAL ONE, MANY PEOPLE HAVE CONGRATULATED
THE CORPORATION ON THE WORK IT HAS DONE; OTHERS
HAVE BEEN HIGHLY CRITICAL, IT WOULD NOT BE
APPROPRIATE FOR ME TO DISCUSS THE DETAILS OF THE
REPORT TODAY, IT IS CLEARLY RECOGNISED THAT ITS
IMPLICATIONS ARE FAR REACHING AND IF IMPLEMENTED
WOULD CHANGE SIGNIFICANTLY THE TRADITIONAL
AUSTRALIAN WOOL MARKETING SYSTEM, THE RECOMMENDATIONS
ARE BEING CLOSELY EXAMINED BY MY COLLEAGUE, THE
MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY, SENATOR WRIEDT, AND
INTERESTED PARTIES CONCERNED WITH WOOL MARKETING,
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS MADE IT CLEAR THAT, JUST AS HE HAD
NO INTENTION OF HURRYING THE CORPORATION INTO COMPLETING
ITS REPORT, HE HAS NO INTENTION OF HURRYING A DECISION
UPON IT UNTIL EVERYONE HAS STUDIED IT CAREFULLY, s17 
-7-
SENATOR WRIEDT HAS ALREADY DISCUSSED THE
REPORT WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF WOOLGROWERS, WOOLBUYERS
AND WOOLBROKERS. HE WILL BE KEEN TO LEARN OF THE
REACTION OF YOUR ORGANISATION AS AN INTERNATIONAL BODY
REPRESENTING THE WOOL INDUSTRY. I EXPECT THE GOVERNMENT
TO DECIDE ITS POLICY ON THE REPORT LATER THIS YEAR AFTER
SENATOR WRIEDT BRINGS PROPOSALS BEFORE THE CABINET,
WE HOPE THE NEW ARRANGEMENTS WILL OPERATE FROM THE MIDDLE
OF NEXT YEAR. I AM SURE SENATOR WRIEDT'S SUBMISSIONS
WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE VIEWS OF ALL THOSE WHO HAVE
DISCUSSIONS WITH HIM. I URGE YOU TO ENSURE THAT HE
RECEIVES YOUR REACTIONS, AT THE SAME TIME, I HOPE
THE DEBATE ON THE MOST APPROPRIATE WOOL MARKETING SYSTEM
WILL NOT BE BASED ON THE SELF-INTEREST OF INDUSTRY GROUPS
BUT WILL BE DIRECTED AT ENSURING THE FUTURE ECONOMIC
STABILITY OF ALL CONCERNED, FROM WOOLGROWERS TO FINAL
PROCESSORS. / 8 
-8-
THERE IS ANOTHER WAY IN WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
CAN ASSIST THE LONG-TERM WELFARE OF THIS GREAT INDUSTRY,
THAT IS BY ENCOURAGING WOOL RESEARCH AND PROMOTION,
MY GOVERNMENT HAS ANNOUNCED A THREE-YEAR SCHEME FOR
THIS PURPOSE BEGINNING IN 1974-75 WE WILL CONTRIBUTE
$ 61,400,000 OVER THE THREE YEARS, I AM GLAD TO SAY
THAT LEGISLATION FOR THIS PROGRAM WAS INTRODUCED IN
THE PARLIAMENT LAST MONTH, BROADLY OUR PURPOSE IS
THAT THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD ASSUME GREATER FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RESEARCH, WHICH BENEFITS THE NATION
TO'T
AS A WHOLE) AND T44E GROWERS FUNDS, COLLECTED THROUGH
THE WOOL TAX, WILL BE DIRECTED MORE TOWARDS PROMOTION,
THE BUDGETS FOR PROGRAMS OF RESEARCH AND PROMOTION FOR
EACH OF THE 3 YEARS COMMENCING IN 1974-75 HAVE BEEN
DEVELOPED IN CONSULTATION WITH THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL
CORPORATION AND, THROUGH THE CORPORATION, WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL SECRETARIAT, WITH THE COMMONWEALTH
SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION, AND
WITH THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS, 
-9-
WE BELIEVE THAT WHILE RURAL PRODUCERS BENEFIT
DIRECTLY FROM MANY OF THE RESULTS OF RURAL RESEARCH, THE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY IN GENERAL ALSO BENEFITS IN MANY
WAYS, BENEFITS ACCRUE, FOR EXAMPLE, THROUGH MORE
ASSURED FOOD AND FIBRE SUPPLIES AS A RESULT OF
PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES IN THE RURAL SECTOR, FURTHER,
RESEARCH PROGRAMS IN AGRICULTURAL AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
OFTEN HAVE BROAD IMPLICATIONS FOR THE QUALITY OF THE
ENVIRONMENT GENERALLY, AND FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF THE
PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY OF RENEWABLE RESOURCES,
RECOGNISING THAT THE BENEFITS OF RESEARCH ARE SO
WIDELY DISTRIBUTED, THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT IT WOULD
BE APPROPRIATE FOR A GREATER SHARE OF THE COST TO BE BORNE
BY A CONTRIBUTION FROM PUBLIC FUNDS THAN HAS BEEN THE
CASE IN THE PAST, IN OTHER WORDS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
DECIDED TO INCREASE ITS SHARE OF THE COST OF THE RESEARCH
PROGRAMS FINANCED FROM THE WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND,
ACCORDINGLY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTRIBUTE THREE QUARTERS
OF THE COST OF APPROVED PROGRAMS OF WOOL RESEARCH, TO BE
FINANCED THROUGH THE. WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND, DURING THE
SECOND AND THIRD YEARS OF THE FORTHCOMING TRIENNIUM,
WOOL PRODUCERS WILL BE ASKED TO FINANCE THE REMAINING ONE
QUARTER, IN ORDER THAT THERE IS ADEQUATE WARNING OF
THESE CHANGED ARRANGEMENTS, THE PRESENT COST SHARING
ARRANGEMENT WILL BE CONTINUED FOR 1974-75, .1./ 10 
10
WITH REGARD TO WOOL PROMOTION, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
CAREFULLY STUDIED THE PROMOTION ACTIVITIES OF THE
INTERNATIONAL WOOL SECRETARIAT AND THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL
CORPORATION, IT IS AGREED THAT THERE ARE STRONG ECONOMIC
ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF WOOL PROMOTION EXPENDITURE AND THE
BENEFITS OF PROMOTION DO SPREAD TO GROUPS OTHER THAN
WOOL GROWERS, IN ADDITION, THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES
THE NEED FOR CONTINUAL DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT OF
THE TECHNICAL PROCESSING PROPERTIES OF WOOL AS A FIBRE AND
THE PROMOTION OF THESE ADVANTAGES AT ALL STAGES IN THE
MARKETING CHAIN, IN THIS WAY THE DEMAND FOR WOOL IS
INFLUENCED, BOTH ABSOLUTELY AND IN RELATION TO COMPEToING
FIBRES, WE BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT THE BENEFITS FROM
PROMOTION ACCRUE MORE DIRECTLY TO PRODUCERS THAN TO
OTHER MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND ACCORDINGLY WOOL
GROWERS THEMSELVES SHOULD MAKE THE MAJOR FINANCIAL
COMMITMENT TO PROMOTION EXPENDITURE, ON THIS BASIS
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO FINANCE ONE QUARTER OF
THE PROJECTED WOOL PROMOTION BUDGETS, LEAVING TO WOOL
GROWERS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF FINANCING THE BALANCE,
AGAIN, IN ORDER TO ENSURE ADEQUATE ADVANCE NOTICE OF
THE CHANGED ARRANGEMENTS FOR FINANCING THE PROMOTION
PROGRAMS, THE GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO DEFER IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE NEW FUNDING BASIS UNTIL 1975-76, ACCORDINGLY, FOR
1974-75 THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONTINUE TO CONTRIBUTE ON AN
EQUAL BASIS WITH WOOL GROWERS TOWARDS THE COST OF BOTH
RESEARCH AND PROMOTION, I ./ 11 
11
AUSTRALIA IS FULLY COMMITTED TO THE GROWTH AND
PROSPERITY OF THE WOOL INDUSTRY, WE WANT TO REMAIN A
DEPENDABLE SUPPLIER OF WOOL TO THE MARKETS OF THE WORLD,
WE WANT FAIR PRICES FOR OUR WOOL AND A STABLE SYSTEM
OF MARKETING, THIS INDEED IS OUR POLICY FOR THE SUPPLY
OF ALL BASIC RAW MATERIALS TO OUR CUSTOMERS OVERSEAS,
WE BELIEVE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL INDUSTRY WILL
PROSPER BEST IN THE CONTEXT OF STRONG RURAL INDUSTRIES
GENERALLY, ALL OUR POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TO THAT
PURPOSE, OUR CURRENCY REVALUATIONS AND TARIFF POLICIES
HAVE, I BELIEVE, HELPED TO RESTRAIN INCREASES IN THE COST
OF FARM EQUIPMENT, OUR INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
HAS BEEN SET UP TO EXAMINE CLAIMS FOR ASSISTANCE FROM
ALL INDUSTRIES PRIMARY AND SECONDARY, WE WANT RURAL
INDUSTRIES THAT CAN STAND ON THEIR OWN FEET, THAT ARE
STRONG AND ADAPTABLE, THAT ARE BUSINESSLIKE AND
EFFICIENT, THAT CAN MEET THE CHALLENGE OF UNCERTAIN
MARKETS AND FLUCTUATING PRICES WITHOUT RELYING
EXCESSIVELY ON GOVERNMENT HANDOUTS AND TAXPAYERS'
SUBSIDIES, ONLY IN THIS WAY CAN WE CREATE GENUINELY
STRONG AND EFFICIENT RURAL INDUSTRIES, A1 
11A
PERHAPS I CAN SUM UP MY GOVERNMENT'S
BROAD INTENTIONS BY QUOTING A STATEMENT BY THE
AUSTRALIAN WOOLGROWERS' AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL,
THE COUNCIL HAS SAID THIS: " THE MOST IMPORTANT
LONG-TERM STEP THE GOVERNMENT CAN TAKE IS TO IMPROVE
THE EFFICIENCY OF NATIONAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION BY
ENCOURAGING THE EXPANSION OF LESS PROTECTED INDUSTRIES
IN THE ECONOMY ( WHETHER PRIMARY OR SECONDARY) AND
DISCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF THOSE INDUSTRIES WHICH
CAN ONLY PRODUCE WITH THE HELP OF MASSIVE LEVELS
OF ASSISTANCE EITHER SUBSIDY OR TARIFF, THIS WILL
INCREASE THE LEVEL OF REAL ECONOMIC GROWTH FOR THE
BETTERMENT OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY,. I SUGGEST
THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS DOING JUST WHAT THE WOOLGROWERS'
AND GRAZIERS' COUNCIL SUGGESTED, I BELIEVE OUR
POLICIES WILL BENEFIT THE GREAT RURAL INDUSTRIES
OF THIS COUNTRY AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AS A WHOLE, / 12 
12
WE HAVE GREAT FAITH IN THE FUTURE OF THE WOOL
INDUSTRY, WE ARE DELIGHTED THAT SO MANY OF ITS
LEADING MEMBERS AUSTRALIA'S GREATEST CUSTOMERS
ARE WITH US THIS WEEK, GOVERNMENTS AND ECONOMISTS
ALONE CANNOT SOLVE THE PROBLEMS OF AN INDUSTRY OR
UNDERSTAND THEM AS WELL AS THE MEN AND WOMEN
DIRECTLY INVOLVED, THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE FOR
PERSONAL CONTACTS BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS IN REACHING
UNDERSTANDINGS AND CREATING THE CONDITIONS FOR
GENUINE AND LASTING PROGRESS, I WISH YOU EVERY
SUCCESS IN YOUR IMPORTANT DISCUSSIONS AND HAVE GREAT
PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THE 43RD INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL WOOL TEXTILE ORGANISATION, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS AND
INQUIRY CENTRE, PITT STREET, SYDNEY, FRIDAY 26 APRIL 1974
One of the great themes that led to the election of the
Australian Labor Party in 1972 was the need for a new openness in
Government. For too long before we came into office, Australian
Governments had operated on the assumption that they knew best,
that the people had no right to be kept fully informed of their
activities. For too long Government decisions had been taken against
a background of secrecy. The people weren't given the facts to
enable them to judge adequately the worth or otherwise of official
decisions which could have momentous, and even tragic, results
for the community. No issue has symbolised this failure in the last
decade more than Vietnam. The people weren't told the whole truth
about this bloody and mistaken war. Yet despite the absence of
Government honesty and frankness, their sons were sent to fight
in that quagmire, to be wounded-and some cases killed.
The failure to communicate with the people took many other
forms. All too often, our predecessors suppressed documents and
reports on which their actions were based, all too often they delayed
the publication of these documents for into intolerable periods.
Their purpose was clear: to prevent the people from having a
proper chance to evaluate their performance.
My party, my Government has been determined to reverse
the secret practices of the past. In my policy speech in 1972 I said:
" We want the Australian people to know the facts, to khow the needs,
to know the choices before them. We want them always to help us as
a government to make the decisions and to make the right decisions."
To achieve this objective, I pledged that a key channel for
communication between the Parliament and the people would be a number
of expert commissions making regular reports and recommendations
on new spending. I made it clear that we would promptly publish
their findings, so that all interested people could know what was
proposed and comment upon those proposals.
On this, as on the rest of the program which I outlined
in my 1972 policy speech, the Government has sought to do what it
promised. In the last 17 months, a number of special bodies have
been established to examine and deal with the needs of Australia
and Australians over a wide range of activities. The Schools Commission,
for example, has been the agent for the transformation of education
in Australia. The Hospitals and Health Services Commission has
provided a framework for a new Commonwealth involvement to meet the
health needs of the community. The Social Welfare Commission has
begun the mammoth task of meeting and co-ordinating social services
throughout the country. As these and other new bodies have reported
to the Government, we have promptly tabled their findings in the
Parliament. We have made it possible for the people to be fully aware
of their recommendations and the reasons behind them. In the first
year alone, 39 reports on inquiries instituted by the Government were
presented to the Parliament, not including reports from Parliamentary
Committees or reports on inquiries instituted by the previous
government. 
-2-
We have proved ourselves as the first Government in a
generation to be frank with the people. We have been the first
Government in a generation to share our decisions and the reasons
for them openly with the whole community. We pledge to continue
on that path, to persevere in the creation of a new tradition of
openness in Government.
In the last week our opponents have suddenly discovered
the words " open government". This discovery has come in the midst
of their rush to produce a brace of policies so that they can pretend
that they have a coherent program. Their spokesmen have promised
that they would publish " wherever practicable" reports, reviews
and other materials concerning Government decisions. Just what does
" wherever practicable" mean? On their past performance it would
mean nothing more than that they would publish such documents only
when it suited their purpose, only when they would face no embarrassment,
only when their decisions had been made and foisted on the community.
I defy anyone to believe that such words have any more meaning,
coming from the same men who suppressed one Government report for
years. In 1958 the Liberal-Country Party Government received the
report of the Morshead Committee on the re-organisation of the
Defence group of departments. A succession of Liberal-Country Party
leaders refused to publish that report. It was finally tabled on
the 30th May 1973 by the Labor Minister for Defence. The parties
that talk so much about the defence needs of Australia weren't prepared
to share with the public vital documents on the administrative needs
of this area. The parties who now expect you to believe that they
want open government for 15 years cloaked that report in secrecy. They
are no more credible when they talk of open government than they are
when they pull out of the hat any of their other hasty and
ill-considered policies.
The only Government that can be trusted when it makes such
a pledge is the present one. It made that pledge 17 months ago and
it has stood by it. If people want the opportunity to share knowledge
and information with the National Government, they have only to give
us a fair chance to continue to honour that pledge.
Open government, of course, must mean more than simply
tabling documents in Parliament and then printing them. It is
vital to our democracy that that be done. But we must go further than
that. The present Government has recognised that there are many
interested and concerned people who will still never have the chance
to see and study those documents if we do not give them wider
dissemination. Many people are not familiar enough with the processes
of Government to know how to get a copy of a government report if it
is only available in Canberra. We want to ensure that Government
publications are not confined to the highly educated, the highly
informed or people with established contacts with Government. If a
Government publication is of interest to any person or group, then the
access to that person or group to that document should not depend on
education or wealth or influence. / 3 
-3-
Similarly, in areas beyond publications, we want to
enable all people to know what the Government is doing, to know
what services are available to them. It is no use if the Government
provides a service and no-one is aware of its existence. Our
predecessors' Health Insurance Subsidy Scheme for low-income earners
is an excellent example of a service of which the very people whom
it was supposed to help overwhelmingly remained ignorant. The
subsidy was supposed to be available; only 4 in every 100 people
who should have been eligible for it received any benefit from it..
That is the importance of this Government P ublications
and Inquiries Centre. By establishing the Centre the Government is
taking the initiative to provide readily accessible means for people
to know what it is doing.
The necessity of getting government to the people is not
unique to Australia. Britain tackled it during the last war by
establishing Citizens Advice Bureaux, Canada has for several years
had a network of regional Inquiry Centres; the United States has
information centres operating in major cities. So last year when
the Australian Government approved a proposal of the Minister for
the Media ( Senator Douglas McClelland) to set up Publications and
Inquiry Centres in the cities and main provincial areas, it was
answering a need to bridge a knowledge gap of Australians.
It should be clear that this centre fulfills two separate
functions. Publications of the Australian Government are sold here
at the lowest price to clear only overheads and publishing costs.
The bookshops are also selling agents for the publications of other
governments. The Inquiry Centre is a different matter. It provides
services free. The public is invited to submit enquiries personally
or by telephone about any aspect of Australian Government activity.
It is not expected that final answers may be provided for all questions
at the centre. Many of the simpler ones can be dealt with on the spot,
but where specialised knowledge is required the inquiry officer will
ref er to an appropriate contact of ficer in the Department concerned f or
the answer. Should the inquiry be more complex, a Central Reference
Unit which is being established in Canberra will search out the
information and return it back to the Inquiry Office by telex or
telephone. The first publications and inquiry office began operating
last year in Canberra. Since then Adelaide and Perth have been added.
After Sydney will come Brisbane, Hobart, Melbourne and Darwin. They
will be extended to the major provincial areas including Albury-
Wodonga, Newcastle, Wollongong, and Townsville. Until these
provincial centres are established, mobile bookshops and Inquiry Centres
are being commissioned to tour rural areas. The first is ready for the
road now. Some of the capital cities including Sydney and Melbourne
have had Government Bookshops for up to six years. But until now they
have not been street level operations designed to engender the
greatest public interest. The relocated shops have immediately shown
sales increases of between 150 and 250 per cent. This alone points
up the need of the public for better access to Government affairs. / 4 
-4-
The inquiry function is also being widely utilised. The
established centres are each already handling more than 30 inquiries
daily and when fully operative the network is expected to deal with
over half a million requests for information by telephone,
correspondence or personal applications in a year.
This new Centre will provide the public in Sydney with
a convenient point of initial contact and is real evidence of our
initiatives towards open government. 



EMBARGO:. 8.00 P.! fi.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP, FOR THE
OPENING OF THE ANNUAL ART EXHIBITION AT ST PATRICK' S COLLEGE,
STRATHFIE. LD, FRIDAY, 26 APRIL 1974
I was assured when I accepted your invitation to open this
exhibition that I could make my speech " as political as you like".
Since we are about to start an election campaign I am happy to
accept your assurance and take you at your word. The question is:
should I make a political speech about art or a political speech
about education? Like St. Patrick's College, we have an excellent
record in both. We have almost doubled Australian Government
assistance to the arts and we have almost doubled Australian
Government assistance to education. Some of the schools we have
assisted are famous schools; some of the paintings we have bought
are famous paintings. At least one of them is very famous. A year
ago everyone had heard of St. Patrick's College but not everyone had
heard of Jackson Pollock. Perhaps there are more votes in education.
Solet me make a " political speech". Let me make this
statement wihout qualification: Education is the greatest single
achievement of the Labor Government. The prospects for education,
the prospects for our children, have been utterly transformed. Look
back to the situation before we came to office. There were vast
deficiencies in the States' education budgets; inequalities between
pupils, inequalities between schools, inequalities between States and
regions, were deeply and hopelessly entrenched. Working-class parents
were taxed so that money could be poured into wealthy schools that
needed assistance least. The Australian Government was giving nothing
not one cent to the recurrent costs of government schools. Whole
areas of education were neglected. Primary schools were downgraded in
favour of secondary schools. Needy secondary schools were downgraded
in favour of prosperous secondary schools. University fees were
restricting tertiary education to those who could afford it, Teachers'
colleges were ignored. Pre-schooling as a right of every Australian
child was practically unheard of. Technical education was the
Cinderella of the system.
On top of that on top of that gross pattern of neglect and
impoverishment education was bedevilled by a futile controversy
over " State aid". The Liberals' twin shibboleths of State aid and
State rights embittered and delayed every rational attempt to give
a new deal to Australian children. We have given that new deal. In
17 months we have scrapped the accumulated deadwood of ad-hoc grants,
patch-up subsidies and makeshift aid programs initiated by our
predecessors. We have given a new charter to the children of
Australia. The old obsession with State aid has been buried for good.
And remember this: State aid was as much an obsession of the right
as it was of the left, as much a preoccupation of government school
supporters as non-government school supporters. Where are the DOGS
now? I have not heard a word from them in this election. The DOGS
have had their day! The prejudice and negativism they promoted and
represented the bitterness they shared with their opponents at the
opposite extreme have disappeared. We have lifted the whole debate
on education out of a miasma of irrelevance and sectarianism. The
beneficiaries are the children of Australia and the generations of
children to come. / 2 
-2-
What must strike any impartial observer of this debate is
the cynical opportunism of the Liberals. For years they decried any
attempt to improve the condition of our schools as an interference
with the rights of States. How often they told us that education
was a " State responsibility". When our programs for increased grants
to schools the Karmel funds came before Parliament last December,
the Liberals voted against them. They opposed the legislation. They
opposed the whole concept cf needs by insisting that we make extra
funds available to A-category schools that needed the money least.
Because of their doctrinaire attachment to the wealthiest schools
they threatened to block our entire program of reform, to prevent
promised funds going to the States even Liberal States for their
education programs, and to hold up the Australian Schools Commission
unless we agreed to stack it with their friends and supporters.
The Country Party and I give credit for this saw the folly of the
Liberals' ways. They voted for our measures while the Liberals
opposed them. I am not sure whether these events were more important
as a commentary on the Liberal attitude to our children's future or
as a commentary on Opposition unity.
I ask you to look at the attitudes of the Liberals now and
contrast it with what they were saying only five short months ago.
Five months ago they voted against our proposals. Today they say
they would match them! Now that an election is coming on, the Liberals
have discovered the value of our reforms. They promise to keep the
Australian Schools Commission if returned to power. They promise to
make the same funds available to schools. Of course, they also
promise to cut back or reduce the growth of Government spending.
The people will have to decide which promise they believe. I simply
ask whether anyone can believe a party or trust a party that within
the space of five months can change its mind completely on an issue
of such radical importance as the education of our children.
So here is the Liberal record on education; 23 years of
neglect, one year of obstruction, six months of silence, and two weeks
of contrition. For a generation they did nothing for the schooling of
the majority of Australian children. Their indifference and contempt
blighted the education of thousands of Australians. They condemned
Australian children to overcrowded classes, ill-equipped and understaffed
schools. They neglected the needs of disadvantaged schools
and isolated children. They neglected the needs of teachers' colleges.
Every other area of tertiary education received some support often
tardy and grudging support but teachers' colleges got nothing.
They particularly neglected the needs of the Catholic sector in both
primary and secondary education. Their aid to Catholic schools failed
to recognise the areas of greatest need and acknowledge the genuine
difficulties of the Catholic system. / 3 
All that has been changed by our legislation. As a result
of our legislation Catholic schools, both primary and secondary,
whether systemic or not, receive recurrent assistance in direct
relation to their needs.
Our program of funding schools according to their needs.
replaces the old system of across the board per capita grants. The
introduction of the new program means that Catholic schools throughout
Australia will receive a total of $ 123 million for the years 1974 and
1975 instead of the estimated $ 76.4 million which would have been
available had the old per capita grants been maintained at the rate
which applied in 1973. New South Wales Catholic schools will receive
$ 47 million under this arrangement. These schools would have received
approximately $ 29 million under the per capita scheme operated by
the previous Government. It has been particularly unfair that some
Catholic school principals have criticised the Labor Government, which
has increased its grants for secondary schools, while making no
criticism of the N. S. W. Liberal Government whose grants for secondary
schools are much lower than those of the State Governments of
Queensland and Victoria.
In the case of non-systemic non-government schools like
St Patrick's College, the Karmel Committee made individual estimates
of the needs of each school, classifying them into eight categories,
ranking from H to A, in ascending order according to the level of
recurrent resources available to pupils at these schools.
St Patrick's was classified as Category G, indicating that the school
should receive recurrent grants at the rate of $ 85 per primary pupil
and $ 130 per secondary pupil in 1974 and $ 120 per primary pupil and
$ 190 per secondary pupil in 1975. As a result of these grants it
is estimated that your school will receive approximately $ 140,000 in
1974 and $ 203,000 in 1975 a total of $ 343,000 for the two years.
Had the previous government' s policy continued, and had the rate of
per capita grants remained unchanged, the school would have received
an estimated $ 220,000 for the two years. In effect, the operation of
the present scheme has resulted in an increase of 56% in recurrent
funds available from the Australian Government to St. Patrick's College.
Let me say a word about the treatment of disadvantaged
schools. We have recognised that certain schools are so deprived
and needy that they are entitled to assistance of a special kind,
apart from the normal criteria of need applied to other schools.
Catholic disadvantaged schools throughout Australia will receive an
additional $ 2.45 million during the 1974/ 75 biennium. Of this,
$ 890.000 will be provided for Catholic schools in New South Wales.
In addition, the Australian Government will make available $ 3.76 million
to disadvantaged schools to undertake building projects in 1974 and 1975.
Of this amount $ 1.3 million will be allocated to New South Wales.
This program was introduced by the present Government. There was no
comparable program of assistance to disadvantaged schools under the
previous Government. ./ 4 
Finally, a word about Catholic and other non-government
teachers' colleges. Because of the neglect of these colleges in
the past, the Commission on Advanced Education has conducted an inquiry
into their needs and recommended support for them. The recommendations
are designed to give assistance by way of recurrent funds for 1974
and 1975. They are in two parts. Firstly, there is a basic provision
for each college which will enable it to meet in reasonable measure
the planned growth for 1974 and 1975, on the assumption that the
proportion of religious in the total staff remains as indicated in
the college submissions. Secondly, the Commission has recommended
an additional sum, over and above that allowed for in the basic
provision, to finance the replacement of religious by lay staff where
necessary. In New South Wales, the Commission has recommended support
for the Catholic College of Education on condition that by the end
of 1975 it has its completed plans for amalgamation with the Good
Samaritan Teachers College and a new institution is set up on a
suitable site. The Commission has also recommended support for
other teaching institutions, including the Catholic Teachers College
at Worth Sydney, the Guild Teachers' College and the Good Samaritan
Teachers College at Glebe Point.
Two weeks ago I wrote to Archbishop Carroll in these terms:
" As part of its education policy, I indicated that my
Government would support teachers' colleges in the same way as all
other tertiary institutions.
" The necessary measures have already been taken to include
government teachers' colleges fully under advanced education
arrangements, and in response to the request made to it last year the
Commission on Advanced Education has recently submitted a report on
financial provision for approved " private" teachers' colleges. The
Government is in the process of dealing with this report which
recommends that approved private teachers' colleges should receive
assistance with recurrent costs from 1 January 1974.
" I am writing to assure you that support will be provided
as soon as the normal parliamentary processes allow. The conditions
of support will be along the lines discussed with the colleges by the
Commission during its investigations and will be directed towards
the rational development of the institutions within the overall
tertiary program." I commend the great contribution of the Catholic system to
the education of Australia's children. For the first time, under this
Government, their true needs and just entitlements have been recognised.
As a result of our policies, Catholic education can look forward to a
secure and prosperous future within a secure and prosperous educational
system. The Christian Brothers have done much to raise the standards
of teaching in our schools and set a proud example of selfless
dedication to the interests of our children. This fine school, with
its fine traditions, exemplifies the best in Catholic education. Your
annual art exhibition is evidence of a lively concern for the cultural,
intellectual and spiritual health of your pupils and the community you
serve. I wish your exhibition every success. I have great pleasure
in declaring it open. 



EMDARGO: 3.00PM TUESDAY 30 APRIL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, TO AN
ELECTION CAIMPAIGN MEETING AT SPRINGVALE TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
VICTORIA, TUESDAY 30 APRIL 1974
Labor is a national party. The Labor Government is a
truly national government. We are the only party whose policies
are directed, not to sectional interests, not to privileged
minorities, but to the welfare of all Australians. For this
reason it was natural and inevitable that we would be the
first party to recognise that the true interests of the majority
of our people would best be served by an attack on the growing
problems of our cities. That was the central and winning theme
of our campaign in 1972. It is the basis of all our major programs
and policies in 1974.
To say this is not to suggesL that we are concerned only
with the cities. Of course we are not. It is merely to recognise
that the greiL majority of our people live in the cities, and that
p; li. ies for cities are therefore policies for peoile. All our
plans fcr a richer and fuller life for pee all our hopes
and ambitions for their future, for the quality of their lives and
their children's lives are bound up with our plans for the cities.
I ask you to keep in mind what this word " cities" implies in the
context of our policies it means better-schools, better transport,
better housing, better health services, better working conditions,
a more beautiful and orderly environment. It means an end to urban
sprawl, an end to squalor, an end to inefficient and dilapidated
public transport, an end to much of the ugliness that has characterised
tlhe working and living conditions of our people for too long.
As in so many areas of political life, our initiatives
f. or the cities have set the pace for all political parties.
For what did " the cities" to the Lib-ral and Country Parties
in 1972? For the Country Party they meant hostile c; icentrations
of power; " city" was a dirty word, and still is a dirty word.
For the Liberals, the cities meant one of two scquare miles of
office blocks and financia; l institutions, the centres of corporate
wealth and power. They had plenty of policies for the insurance
companies and stockbrokers who made up the Liberal concept of the
city. But for the millions of Australians who lived in tho suburbs,
especial]. y in the fast growing outer suburbs, who yearned for a better
deal in education, housing, transport, sewerage, health services and
so many other things, the Liberals had nothing to offer at all.
How gratifying it is that the Opposition is now putting forward
policies for the cities how gratifying, yet how cynical! / 2 
2.
How empty and belated their promises are now.
The men who ignored the cities for 23 years, who left them
to the tender mercies of land sharks, property speculators
and developers, who tolerated generations of urban sprawl,
ugliness and inefficiency, who did nothing about the great
and growing problems of high land prices, run-down transport,
unsewered suburbs and inadequate health care these men now
come before you with their so-called policies for the cities,
policies flung together three or four weeks before a national
election which they have forced on the people by a gross
violation of constitutional principles. Of course our Iopponents
have " policies" for the cities. They dare not run away from
this issue any longer. Their policies, insofar as they amount
to anything at all, amount to no more than a continuation of
the programs my Government has initiated and pursued during
the past 17 months. I merely ask: whom should you trust
to carry out these policies? The men who spurned them for so
long, and have indeed done much to frustrate them during my
Government's period of office; or the men who worked for
years to create and propound these policies, and who see them
as a basic and central ingredient of our whole political
philosophy? In my policy speech in 1972 1 said that " a national
government which cuts itself off from responsibility for the
nation' s cities is cutting itself off from the nation's real life".
In its direct involvement in cities the Australian Government has
entered the mainstream of Australian life. We want to remould,
modernise and revitalise our cities; and ~ to do that we want to
remould, modernise and revitalise the relations between the three
levels of government national, local and State. The national
government must accept at least as much responsibility for cities
and centres as the national governments of comparable countries
already do. At last we have a national government which is doing
just that. We also have a national c:'-7ernment which is determined
to see that local government the area of government closest to
the people and closest to their needs should have the opportunity
and the financial resources to carry out their responsibilities.
for the benefit of the cities, for the peop ' le, of Australia.
Our referendums to be held with the election on 18 May will
enable us to make grants direct to local government bodies
who request-them. We want to make local government. a genuaine
partner in the federal system. This proposal has t1' rof
the overwhelming majority of local government as~.. n
and councils throughout Australia.
Let me recall some of the g~ reat things we undertook to
do in attacking the problems of the cities and improving the lives
of their people. From the outset we set about this task with
speed, with vigour and with determination. 
I 3.
I promised in 1972 to establish a Department of Urban
palnadn sR egfioor naela chD evceiltyo pmaenndt rteog ioann alaynsd e, t o raedsveiasrec h thaen d ncatoi-oonradlinate
government on grants for urban purposes. The Department was
established as soon as we came to power. It is functioning
with great effect under the leadership of Tom Uren.
I promised that we would request the Grants Commission
to recommend the amount of national government assistance
required to remove the inequality of servicing developing
regions. We have carried out that promise. One of the first
acts of the new Parliiut. len. t enpow. ered the Grants Commission to
make grants to local government for this purpose i: 1 the same
way that it has traditionally recommnended grants needed to
remove inequalities between the States.
I promised that one of 1he functions of the Department of
Urban and Regional Development would be to conserve the National
Estate, our national and man-made heritage. We have established
a committee of inquiry on the National Estate and have received
its report. Our first Budget provided an initial $ 2.5 million
to be applied to the preservation of the national estate.
I promised that we would make grants to the State
Ilousing Commissions for welfare housing purposes conditional
on the funds being spent on housing communities which
provide a safe, pleasant, modern and civilised environment.
Our Budget raised the allocation for welfare housing by
26 per cent. The national government has assumed virtually
full responsibility for this important field.
I undertook through the establishment of a
Schools Commission that the national government would accept
direct responsibility for schools, whose welfare bears
directly on the quality of life in the cities. I pointed
out that the previous Government's system of per capita
grants to non-government -chools -ilone did nothing to help
tl-e stabli u: L ent r-f new Catholic schools in gro': ing areas
such as this a-. i no incUlti\' es for the reduction of
class sizes or for the training of teachers in existing
Catholic schools. It left existing Government schools
as deprived and overburdened as ever. Through the Schools
Commission the national government has accepted a continuing,
comprehensive commitment to all schools on the basis of needs
and priorities. We have almost doubled national government
expenditure on education.
I saiO w determined that every child in Australia
; oucli have tie same opportunity then enjoyed only by children
in Canberra to a full year's pre-school education from qualified
staff in proper buildings. The Budget allocated $ 10 million
foi ani early start for the redemption of this promise and we
are providing a further $ 8 million to help in the construction
and operation of child-care centres. 
I promised a vigorous attack on the backlog of sewerage
in our major cities. $ 30 million was provided in the 1973/ 74
* Budget to make a start on overcoming this backlog. Discussions
are under way'with the States to develop a continuing longterm
program beginning in 1974/ 75.
I promised special help for the new developing regions
of our cities. As a result, $ 8 million was provided in the
1973/ 74 Budget to provide urgent assistance to local government
bodies in the western sectors of Melbourne and Sydney.
I pledged an all-out drive to create new cities and
regional growth centres. The Australian Government has offered
financial assistance to the States for a program of development
of twelve new growth centres in sub-metropolitan and regional
locations. An amount of $ 33 million was * provided in the 1973/ 74
Budget. We have made a bold and encouraging start with the*
new city of Albury-Wodonga. This is an outstanding example
of co-operation between the Victorian, New South Wales and
Australian Governments.
I promised a vigorous campaign to upgrade the standards
of urban public transport. We are providing $ 32 million this
year to the State Governments for urban public transport
improvements. We are proposing to provide another $ 41 million
to complete projects comnmencing this -vear. Half the money
has been allocated for the acquisition of new railway rolling
stock, buses and trains. Additional new railway tracks will
be built in Melbourne to relieve congestion and increase
the capacity for express services operating to outer suburban
areas. Fundamental to our plans for better cities is'an attack
on the crippling problem of land prices. The cost of land is
the greatest single component in the cost of a home and the
greatest impediment to a fair deal for the average homebuyer.
We pledged to set up Land Commissions with the help of the
States to buy up large tracts of residenthial land in new
suburbs and towns and sell them at fair prices as fullyserviced
building blocks. The anti-Labor States have stalled
on this proposal. They have dithered and blocked our planswhile
the cost of buildingx land has contiruee to soar. Who
are the interests who benefit front this obstruction? They
are the land speculators, the profiteers and developers who
have grown fat on the savings of young Australian families.
Their interests, and their interests alone, have been served
by the dilatory and obstructive tactics of the anti-Labor
States. Remember that the States have all the powers they need
to control the soaring price of land. The anti-Labor States
refuse to use them. And all the time land is becoming
increasingly expensive further beyond the reach of the average
wage earner. In Melbourne the average cost of a block of
land is $ 13,000; in Sydney it is $ 18,000. In fAelbourne the
rate of inflation in the cost of land more than doubled in
1973. It increased by 46 per cent, while average earnings 
Sby 12 per cent. The cost of land in Melbourne now
'. esents 60 per cent of the cost of a home. It takes the
. ivalent of 22 months' wages to buy an average block of
in Melbourne and 32 months' wages in Sydney. The Li bera. L
Governments have done absolutely nothing to check this
jndalous profiteering in the price of land. They have
, eat powers at their disposal. They have done nothing.
My Government established its Land Commission program
to attack this urgent problem. We are determined to provide
land at prices people can afford. We will not tolerate the
increasingly common spectacle of thousands of young homeseekers
being turned away from land auctions in Melbourne and Sydney
while prices. soar beyond their reach. In the first part
of our program, we offered the Victorian Government $ 30 million
for a land acquisition program the highest amount for any
State. New South Wales was offered $ 28 million, the Queensland
Government $ 6 million, the Western Australian Government $ 6 million
and the Tasmanian Government $ 1 million. Only in South Australia
has the Government taken appropriate action to attack land
price.-s, and their legislative steps have done much to
stabilise the price of land. They have also sjigI1d an agreement
with ry Government they are the first State to do so
for the establishment of a Land Commission. What a contrast
with the anti-Labor States! In New South Wales where
land prices are at catastrophic levels the Askin Government
has refused to accept our offer. In Brisbane where land
price inflation is running at 100 per cent a year, the highest
in Australia the Queensland Government has also rejected our
offer. In Western Australia a hostile Upper House prevented
the recent Labor Government from accepting our Land Commission
proposal. And under Hamer nothing happens. There could be
no better example of State Government obsuruction at the expense
of the people in Australia's cities.
Despite all the Liberal talk a. out the cities, their
sudden discovery of the plight of city dwellers, their lastminute
conversion to the cause of the cities, their record
on land prices shows where their real interests lie.
Here is an area where the Liberal/ Country Party State
Governments have great and undoubted powers. They have
refused to use them. We will be judged by our record and
performance. Let the homeseekers and young families of
Australia judge the Liberals by theirs.
In the light of their miserable and obstructive record,
. iho can take their last-minute promises seriously? They are
vague and unspecified promises. Over all their promises
for the cities, for education, health and welfare hangs
the equally vague and unspecified commitment to cut. back on
Gov-enment spending. The people of Aus-alia can be sure of
one thing: if the Liberals were to cut back on spending, they
would make their cuts in the only area where econo.: ies w.:. uld
be meaningful that is, in the essential and histric
programs my Government has undertaken to improve our citiz:;
and make them worthy places for ustralian people. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR 1WPRIM'E MIiNISTER F
PERTH-LUNCNEON-MEETING 2 KAY 1974
Or ALL T HE ISSUES THAT HAVE EMERGED DURING
THIS CAMPAIGN THE GREATEST OF THEM INVOLVES THIS BASIC
QUESTION: WILL AUST. RALLANS CONTINUE TO CONTROL THEIRj
OWN ECONOMIC DESTINY OR ARE W'E TO BECOME TENANTS IN
OUR OWN LAND? SEVENTEEN MONTHS APO IPUT TO THE AuSTRALIAN
PEOPLE CERTAIN PROPOSALS DESIGNED TO REVERSE THE
INSIDIOUS PROCESS BY WHICH THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT
ALLOWED CONTROL OF OUR ECONOMIC DESTINY TO PASS OUT
OF OUR HANDS. THE POLICIES OF THE OPPOSITION IN THIS 1
tRE SPECT SHOW NO REAL CHANGE, THIS ELECTION M1AY WELL B3E
THE LAST OCCASION ON wHicH AUSTRALIANS ARE ABLE TO CHOOSE
THEIR FUTURE COURSE, ' TO CONSERVE AN INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC
INHERITANCE FOR OUR CHILDREN AND OUR CHILDREN' S CHILDREN$ 
-2-
WH-EN THE AUSTRAL IAN LAnOR PARTY WAS [ N Oo p IPOSITION
PREPARED AND PRESENTED CERTAIN POLICIES BASED ON A BELIEF.
AT AUSTRALIANS; COULD, AND INDEED MUST,. CONTROL THEIR'BASIC
NDUSTRIES AND RESOURCES. LET' ME SAY TI[ S,, WE HAVE NOW HAD
/ EXPERI-ENCE OF GOVERNMENT., WfE.. A1AVE HAD ' ACCESS TO THEEXETS
AND THE INFORMATION AVAILABLE 1TO' GOVERNMENTS I AND ALL* OF'A
* MY-MINISTERS, HAVE BROADENED OUR EXPERIENCE, EXTENDED OUR
KJOLDGEAND HORIz'ON31 IY C fIWCrO0SN77 -I VA TT ER, AND
UNF I TED CONV ICTI ON* OF MYW tABINET AND OV MY PARTY, HAVE BEEN
A MEDAND STRENGTIHENED. AUSTRALIANS MUST-PRESERVE OUR
ECONOMIC INDEPENDENC-IE. WE MUST-ftEJECT. THE SEDUCTIONS OF THEoujcK
DEAL AND RESIST THE 7FMPTATIONS TO PROJF'IT' AT THE EXAPENSE
OF-OUR. CHILDREN'S INHERITANCE, WE HAVE FOUGHT. FOR OUR. 3-
INDEPENDENCE IN SEVERAL WARS, WHAT ARMS COULD NOT CONQUER,
MUST NOT BUY'i, I AEHERE TO WE STERN AUSTRALIA BECAUSE IT IS'
H THATIN RECENT Y EAR Ir THE CHO01CE IHAVE DESCRIBED HAS BEEN
MOST ACUTE# ICAME HERE PARTICULARLY TO CHALLENGE THE MOST
INSIDIOUS OF ALL PROPAGANDA IMPOSED I N THIS DEBATE. OUR OPPONENTS
H4AVE SWALLOWED THE MULTINATIONAL LIE : THAT WITHOUT UNRESTRICTED
FOREIGN INVESTMENT, CUR DEVELOPMENT IS-RESTRICTED. IDON ' T
ACCEPT THIS PROPOSITION AND IDON'T BE L IEVE AUSTRALIA COULD
1AFFORD TO ACCEPT THIS PROPOS ITIO101 w. 
' I 3-
THE QUESTION IS NOT W4HETHER WE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL
TO DO LESS THE QUESTION IS WHETHER WE CAN ENSURE THAT
AuSTRALIAN CAPITAL DOES MORE, OUR Ot1JECTIVE SHOULD BE
TO MOSILISE THE RESOURCES OF OUR PEOPLEj HUMAN AND CAPITAL,
AND THE POWERS OF OUR GOVERNMENITS, 90TH STATE AND FEDERAL,
WE'MUST SIOP THE ABILITY OF MULTINATIONALS TO DIVIDEt AND
O1ULE OUR STATE GOVERNMENTS AND PRIVATE COMPANIES#
WESTERN AUSTRALIANS SHOULD KEEP * IN MIND THE FACT
THAT M4ANY OF THE CORPORATIONS WITH WHICH YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT
DEALS HAVE A BUDGET TEN. TIMES THE BUDGET OF YOUR STATE
GOVERNMENT, AuSTRALIANS MUST UNITE 1O MOBILISE THEIR
RESOURCES'. N4o AUSTRALIAN COMPANY ALONE CAN DEAL ON THE
LEVEL OF MULTI-NATIONAL CORPORATIONS. NO AUSTRALIAN
* STATE ACTING ALONE CAN DEAL-WITH ' THEM, ONLY THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT HAS THE RESOURCES AND THE STATURE TO DO SO,
U WE'MU-ST MOB* ILI* S'E OUR RESOURCES AND OUR SKILLS.
THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COMMONWEALTH ACTING ALONE CAN BE
MOST EFFECTIVE. THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COMMONWEALTH
CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE S) TATES.
THERE ARE FIELDS WHERE THE COKMONWEALTH CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE
IN PARTNERSHIP HITH PRIVATE CAPITAL, F]
F ~ j~~ jft
12 1 Ar
I I
I t t y-, jjr: 2~ R
4 U.
-v
U
I;-I'
ii
Ii II
' I 
145
WHAT WE MUST DO AS-A NAT ION 3 S TO DEVE LOP THE POLICIES AND
ESTABLISH THE INSTITUTIONS WHICH VAKE SUCH ACTION AND SUCH 1
PARINERSHIP WORK, I'l
OF THE MANY MEASURES FRUSTRATED AND BLOCKED BY
THE SENATE, TWO OF THE MO ST' SI1GNIF I CANT INVOLVE THIS
~~ ESTION, THE OPPOSITION HAS FRUSTRATED OUR PLANS TO
BROADEN THE SCOPE OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT ~ U~
SRP ORATION AND TO ESTABLISH THE PETROLEUM ANDMNLSf. kL
THORITY, OUR OPPONENTS' RESISTANCE TO THESE MEASURES l^
TO PROMOTE AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP FORMS PART OF A PATTERN o F
ENCOURAGEMENT OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP WHICH THEY SET WHEN IN
GOVERNMENT, THEY ASSERT THAT AUSTRALIAN PRIVATE CAPITAL
SHOULD BE LEFT UNIMPEDED.
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT PREPARED TO LEAVE THIS
SIC ISSUE IN THE HANDS OF THE COMPANIES AND THE MEN WHOr
KNONE OF THE RISKS NECESSARY TO OBTAIN FOR AUSTRALIA
A LARGER SHARE IN OWNERSHIP, CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT OF
OUR NEW RESOURCES. UNDER OUR PREDECESSORS, SIXTY-EIGHT PER
CENT OF OUR ENERGY RESOURCES FELL INTO THE HANDS OF FOREIGN
COMPANIES, NOTHING CAN CONVINCE ME 7HAT THIS WAS NECESSARY. 71
VutlS tt~ f* S fl 
' I~ r CAPACITY OF THESE COMPANIES TO SHOW INITIA7IVE AllD
ENTERPRISE /% ND TO0 T AKE R ISKS CAN ONLY B E STRENGTHENED B~ Y.
MOL1i. N IUSTRALIAN RESOUIRCES AND PO WERS lNHcIs, I s wHY
WE NEE D TO EXPAND T H E ROLE OF THE AhSTRALIAN' INPDUSTRY
lkVCLOPMFmT CORPORAl ION AND ESTABLISH THE-Pu TROL EllM A ND
MINERALs AUlTHORITY. SNI C(-WE WERF ELECTED 10 GOVERNMENTW4E H-AVE.'
ALRrADY SHOWN 711E ADVANTAG-ES O F SUCH AC: TION FOR THE
F IRST TIME I N OUR HISTORY 11W-AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS*
INIERVENED P. Y SUPERV I I ON OF iNENAL EXP'ORTS TO S71, GHE
THlE BAfKGAININ( c-POWER OF OUR EXPORTERS, WE WFRE DETERMINED
THAT OUR RESOURCES WOULD NOT t SOLD ON TIfI E CHEAP. N
LONG~ ER CAN F OR E I GN BUYERS PLAY THE GAME OF DIVIDE AND RULE
T1O0 XTkA CT LOWER PRICE S FROQM OUR COM PA Nl tS~ AN D COCSION-S
FROM OUR STATE GOVERNMENTS. lIfE Or'OS IT ION s POLICY: IS
P OMINOUSLY SILENT IN THIS RESPECT. WILL THEY ABOLISH OUR
EXP'ORT CONTROL REGUJLAT IONS?.
THlE ACTIONS OF THE USTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAVE
RESULTED 114 SIGNIFICANT INCREASE, IN THE PRICE OF OUR' ) RON
ORE AND COAL EXPORTS. THE mET ULTOF, TI-S POLICY PAS
MEANT AN EXTRA $ 67 MILLION P ER A NNU M IN INCOME FROM IRON ORE
AND AN, EXTRA $% MILL10ON PEP, ANNUM IN iXPOfT INCOME FROM COAL. N
V ' I I
r .4-
j; A,
I 1'* i. 
j
IN THIS tvAY ALL JAUS7RALIAfIS INEF IT F R TPE COrJCE NTRAI I CJHs
OF OUR BARGA) NIN6 POW'ER, WIE MUcST UNITE IN I HF SAME MANNER
TO fPRCSFR 01H-4N rc HI P AND CO1NTROL Or 0 UR INDU*&gt; TRI Es
AND RESOURCES.-
DEEP OFI SMHOSCKR AT HTHTEW SNAETNIOANSARLL ASSCSANADEA. YL SREENVSEAEL ED BYC
W THE FITZGERALD REPORT, MIANY WESTERN AUSTRALIANS PROfA13LY~ 4
BELIEVED THAT 114CI R MINFRAL INDUSTRY WAS PAYING SIG; NIFICANT V
AMPOUNTS IN TAXATION, SOME OF YOU ALLFGED THAT THIS MONEY
WAS BEING DRAINED OFF T0 711E OTHER Si,-fss L n ME MAKE
T1IS CLEAR IF THFERE WAS ANY DRAIN OF 7HE WEALTH PRODUCED
IN WFSTERN AuSIRALIA 1T DID NOT GO TO THlE OTHER STATES;
IT WENT OVERSEAS* H FITZGFRALD REPORT REVEALS THAT OVER
THE LAST SIX YEARS THE IMINING COMPANIES MADE $ 2,072 MILLON
IN PROFIT, THCY RECEIVED FROM THE AuSTRALIAN TAXPAYER i
$ 341 MILL110N IN SUB~ SIDIES AND PADOL,$~ bMILLONITA
D AND ROYALTIES % MILLION LESS, AND SIXTY PER CENT OF
THIESE PkROF TS ACCRUE TO OVErSE. Zf* A0-INVESTORS, INDEED, THE
ANNUAL AMOUNT Orr PROFITS'PAYA13LE OVERSCAS fROSEL SIXFOLD IN
THE F IVE YEARS tEDING JUNE. 197 3. 
TtiE AUSTRAL I AN GOVERNMhENT IS OU! T1[) T HF
CON~ T INUAT I O' OF S I 611 I F I CANT CAP ITAL INV[ STMENT [ fI M[ N[ ING.
lii IN'E STiFNT SHOULD 1\ OT INVOLVE Lb S S E. 1T0 THE AI Of IAL
REVFNU1, NOR SHOULD. 1T PR IMAR ILY PROiMOTE FORE I Gf
PROr ITA) I. t17Y, AM AWARE orF THE BENEF I TS'IHA THE MI14 1 NG
INDUSTRY HAS 1DOL'GHT TO THEL Fsr. 11 WHOLE THRUISI of-MY
ARGUMENT IS THAT 14SIERN AU,' TRALIANS-I-IKL' ALL AUSl) TRAL IANSJ
SHUD HAVE BENEFITED MORE FROM THIS' DEVELOPMENTO WlE HAVE
-NOT TAKEN FLL1. ADVANTAGE OF OUR RESOURCES IN TERMS OF
PROM01 ING THlE WELFARE OF THE A uSTRALIAN PEOPI F 141 INTEND
TO 110 S0 I N THE FUTURE,.*.
S S 4
4 f. 
14F HAVE ALfREADY ANNOUNCED OUR 114TENTION TO EXTEND
AND STRENGTHEN THE FOREIGN TAKEOV/ ERS LEGISLATION,
THIS IS ONE Or THE MEASURES WHICH WA S FRUSTRATED BY THE
OBSTRUCTFION OF -THE %. ENATE, W4E PROPO. SE AND I ANNOUNCE -I
HERE FOR THE FIRST TIME"-THREE BASIC EXTENSIONS OF THIS
LEGISLATION1 THE MOST SERrOUS OMT-oioN IN THE* PRESENT ACT
I S THAT I T APPLIES ON[ LY TO THE PURCHASE Or SHAPES.
IT DOES NOT PREVENT AN OVERSEAS3 COMPANY BUYING ALL OR PART
OF THE ASSETS OF AN AuSTRALIAN COMPANY AS DISTINCTK.
rROM THE SfAREHOLD INGSS T HIS I S A MAJOR LOOPHOLE.
THE EFFECT OF AUYING SHARES OR BUYING ASSFTS IS THE SAME,
Ta Ecr)! THE LFGISLATION IS THAT
IT DOES NOT INCLUDE COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION RE. QUIREMENTS
FOR [ OREIGN COMPANIES PROPOSING TO MAKE SUCH A TAKEOVER
OF ASSETS, WE WILL iNCLUDEF SUCH PROVISIONS# 
' 7'
WE PROPOSE A THIRD AMENDMENT,
THE LEGISLATION DOES NOT EXTEND TO COMPANIES At-READY UNDER
FOREIGN CONTROL BUT IN WHICH THERE IS A SIGHIFICANT, MINORITY
AbSTRALIAN INTEREST, THFRE HAVE' BEEN A NlJMP[ VR OF-OCCASiONG
W4HEN THE AoST RAL IAN EQUITY fIN A VENTURE I IAS BPE[ EN DIMIIN1 SHED
BY A SHARE ISSUE OR A'SHARE SVAP, 1WE P ROP OSE THAT;
t -ON CERTAIN CRITERIA, ANY AITIMPT TO DIMIN1-1i A SIGMIF ICANT
AI sRAL IA14 INTEREST; EVENIF IT IS A lnOl-CONTROL LINMC
INTEREST, SHOULD DL MADE EXAMINABLE IN1 ACCORDANC. E WITH
THE PROCEDURES DEVELOPED BY THlE FOREIGN TAKFEcV[ R COtMMIrTEE
CONTROL OF FO0R EI G f TAKEOVERS Is0O NE ASPFCT OFI
MOICY DESIGNED TO MAX I m i s AusTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.
TUE GOVERNMENT IN ITS At'M IN I STRAT IVE ARRANGEMENTS, 14AS CESTABL ISt
A BROADER SYSTEM OF SURVEILLANCE OF FORFEIGN INVESTMENT PROPOSAL_' i_...
NOT INVOLVING DIRECT ACQUISITION OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESSES.
' ANNOUNCED IN MY POLICY SPEECH TH-AT VIE WHOULD FORMALISE THESC
ARRANGEMENTS, WE WILL ESTABLISH A BROAD sCREENING, PROCESS1
WHICH WILL-COVER BO0TH THE FOREIGN TAKECOVERS PROCEDURES,
AS AMENDEDi AND NEW DIRECT FOREIGN I NVE STXENT. ANY. NEW
FOREIGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO SeET UP IN AoSTRALIA'FOR THE
FIRST TIME, OR ANY' FORE'IGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO EXTEND ITS
INVESTMENT INTO NElq AREAS, WILL BE REOUIRED TO APPL* Y TO 111E
Y AD HE ETILS* OF THE PROPOSED -INVESTMENT WILL BE-
,4EAURY ND T DET 04 
7 1 sIENN RCS JLElSUETA N
FRANC HE SR E ENIC ND DOEVSL L H SRTE THATD ANRE
' ROPOSIN FEGTL IHNVESTGE WICHSIS POLICIES CNORAX
AVIDACE OVERAR ALP ATIODAL tTIE GUDZ NE THEIE SE
WHIC HWILL BECEOE MOR CULA TENTOR EXPRIEC GRPOST
RINCOMPANIES ALREADY OPERFAT ! NG ' AN AUSTRALIA WILL
E EXPECTED TO CONFORM, W~ ITH THESE GUIDELINES PROORESSIVELY.
IN TH1S WAY WE WILL ENSURE TVAT THE FOREIGN INVESTMtNT
TH~ AT HAS ALREADY BEEN ALLOWED IL COFR T H
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL INTEREST AS WELL AS ANY NEW FOREIGN
INVESTMENT THAT 1S ALLUKID.-
No AusTRALIAN, NO MATTER HOW STRONGLY( HE BEL 1EVES
IN 11AE RAPID DEVCLOPMENT OF OUR l) UIRAL RESOUC
StIOULD PAY FOR THE PRI'/ lLE. G O) F liii 11,16 LXPLOITED.
THE MESSAGE OF THlE F112GEWILD REPORT IS CLEAR,
WE HAVE SOLD OURI'; ELVES SHORT IN OUR RECENT MIN) ERAL DEVELOPMENTr
Tal PEOPLE WHO HAVE SUFFERED MOST FROMi THE FAILUJRE OF THE
PREVIOU1S GOVERNMENT TO CkT TI FL I2FITS For AUJSTRALIANS9
ARE THE PEOPLE OF THIS STAII, WHERE MINEVAL t'E-VEl.. OPMENTSl
HAVE BEEN THE MOST DRAMATIC. ThE FA . ILURC I( O MAXIMI . SE
OUR REVENUE IS A FAULT OiF THE LAST FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AS
WELL. AS THE ft. CSENT STATE IGD V ERN K[ INT
THE REVE14UE wHict TrHE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
RECEIVE) t. VEN FPOh~ THE DECISIONS AI. PSEAPY ' TA KE No WILL ENABLE
US TO COMWVf CONSIDERABLE ADOUNTS TO0 EXPELORATION FOR
FURT11ER RESOURCES AND THE DFVELOPMElT OF THOSE RESOURCESBy
itHE AUSTRALIAN fOVERNMENT DIRECTLY AND 1IN PARTNERSHIP
WITli PRIVAt AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL. MUCHi OF THIS EXPENDITURE
ON EXPLORAT ION AND D) EVELOPMENT VMLL OF NECESSITY BE
rJIRCCTED TO' THE GREAT MINERAL RESOURCES IN THE wEST. OnfLY
IF THlL ' AusTRALIAN GOt-VERNMIENT PLAYS A DIRECT ROLE IN Tlic
PROVISION AND MORILIGAT ION OF CAPITAL WILL OUR RESOURCES
ttE DEVELOPED' IN A MANNER CONS I ST) ENT WII1H MAXl1MW~ AIST R AL-I At
CONT ROL AND 0OWNERSHIP. K] ' 1' S .1
iv
Q~ A. A.. 74
-A ' I
ñ 11 
THE R~ E VEFL A I) N S OF 7HC FIT ? GFRALD. kEPORT APE
pis iOWEVEtR ' T I S C! FAR FP.' M THEI P RECENT
STITE IENITS THAT THE-GUL TY MEN COF THE: PR~ EVIOUS GOV/ ERNMENT
TtHE INEi WHO At. LO'IED T F S S 1 -TUIAT 1O TO EMiERGE AAP . E
UN RElf-E N TANT THXE Y HAVE NO PLAN -NO I NT E. N 7' ON -TO
* REDUICE FORET1GN CONTROL OF OUR RESOURCES, OiN THE ATF
OF TAXAT 1O0N CON~ CE S ONNP N D LS0~ Slt THEY CONTINUE TO i~
~ CT AND TALK AS THE APOLOGISTS-OF FOREF IGN 111ING INTERESTS,
HAUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE THE RIGHT TO KNOW HOW T HE
EXTRAM INARY CRUSANC, r -) LprWt HICH MADE
AuST RAL IANS3 PAY FOR THE E$ RIVIL EGE OF BEING; E\. DL01T E D3
W4E WILL E N' 01.0A GE AND 1) EV71LOP onR M f,!" AL7
WINJ( JSTRJ-E* S BULT WE ARE EQUALL YD, k" 1NF TO MAXIMISE
THE CONTR [ ULT I CN THE SE rNDUSTR IE orMAAKE TO OUR NATIONAL
' F AT H ' A HAVE TODAY SIGNE1L1 A REFFRENCF TO THE D S RE
# Ass! ISTANCrE CO MM I S t' ASKING ! T TO INQ:) UIPE ANI' REPORT ON
THE EFF-ECT 0 r T A XATNIC 0~ ICE Sf ON SSA ND R0 LT7 IE ON THE,
DE V EL C) PMLN T A-N D EF F I C .1IVNY O THE PETROLEUM IAit N IING
I L ST R IE A i T 0 A D'yIIS E F~ H P% A ND N1W14H AT WAY0. WE
SHOULD OFFER ASSISTANCE T0 r'R IMPOSE R0Y A L T I , S ON THEE
411t J" 
S. t-THE FITZGERAL) REPORT REVEALtED TIlE SEERITY OF
THF LOSSES AND LOST OPPoRtU! ITIE I IHAT UUCO-ORDINATFL)
AND t4BUSINES5LIKE POLICY-MKAIN IN MI! lftljUG OPERATIONS
HAS ALREADY INFLICTED ON 09, THE REPORT OF THE COMMISSIOI 1
WILI ENSUIRE 1110 THE LOSSES WlILL. NOT CONTI NUE AND MY -i
GOVCRNMENT WILL CNSORE THAT THE GREAT LBENEFITS ACCRUIG
fiRM THF IEVELOPM'ENT Or OUR NATURAL RE8OirPCES ouR
NATURAL HERITAGE WILL PE SHAPIEr FAIRLY BY ALL
S -AUSTrALiANS I1N THI-1E INTERESTS OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.-



ELECTIONS 13 MiAY 1974
THE POLICY SPFCl
THF' PRIM~ E MINISTER OF AUSTRbALIA6
HON. E. G. TV71ITLAM, -P
9 . BIArKTO' TN,,
29 APRIL. 1974
A IT. S t. A"
INDExeo Co~ y.
Jjj. . A U 8 r I I A I I A 6q 
Men and Women of Australia,
Just 17 months ago, I stood here, and from this
place and from this city I asked you to choose for Australia
a new team, a new program, a new drive for equality of
opportunities. You gave us a clear mandate to go ahead with
our program for the next 3 years. For 17 months we have
driven ourselves to carry out you;: mandate, to carry out the
program I placed before you. Now the government you elected
for 3 years has been interrupted in mid-career. Our program
has been brought to a halt in mid-stream.
Everything we promised, everything we have achieved,
everything you expected of us your expressed hopes for
yourselves, your families, your nation all this is suddenly Lt=
threatened. It is threatened by the actions of the men you oco
I rejected a mere 17 months ago.. It is threatened by the actions
of men elected to the Senate not in 1972, but in 1967 and 1970.
It is threatened by men who refused to stand by the umpire's
verdict your verdict to give , s a chance, to give you a
chance, to give Australia a new chance.
These men who have falsified democracy now ask
you to turn back. Turn back to what? Think again how it n
was when you elected us in ! 972. Unemployment was at its " 4 A
worst for 10 years. Our rate of gr: owth was one of the
world's worst a paltry 20. The Australian dollar was
grossly undervalued. Foreign money was. flooding in to buy
up Australian resources and Australian industries on the chieap.
Accelerating numbers of nigrants w/ ere leaving in disillusion.
Australia was still deeply involved in the war in Viet Nam.
Our whole foreign policy was based on hostility to China. We
were running an army on the cheap by conscripting young men.
There were young men in prison foe their conscience.
Australia was a. d2ep3y divided nation. Our young people were
becoming alienated frorr. the mainstream of Australian society.
S The disrespect in which our nation.-al leadership the Liberals
were held at home had spread to cidre~ ect for Australia abroad.
Think again, indeed!
Mark today's contrast. The Australian economy i
one of the most buoyant and vigorous in the world.
Full employTmnt has been restored. Business
activity is at its highest for a decade, company profits are
at record levels and business expectations are at an all time
high. Through our economic policies and our social security
program, Australia's prosperity i3 becoming more fairly shared
than ever before. Abroad, Australia has never stood so tall. We have
buried old animosities. We dare-hold in new respect by old
friends and allies. Never in her history has Australia been
more secure. 
2
We have ended national division, national
disunity by ending our involvement in Viet Nam, and ending
conscription. We have opened up new and expanding markets for As,
our farm products. By placing family reunion for migrants above mere f'e
recruiting, we have stopped the rmigrant drift. t
For the first time Australia has a government
determined to promote Australian ownership and control of
Australian industries and resources. 0 N( 446 ' IR
O-^ N&amp; oub
For the first time fcr a generation Australia has
a government dedicated to equal opportunity for all its
citizens. We have more than doubled spending on schools. d JLu-cJG
We have abolished fees at universities, colIee 3 of zaivanced
education and going one better than oar pledge at technical
schools. For the first time Australia has a government
determined to make the conditions of life more equal for all
Australians, wherever they live in Australia.
For the first time Australia has a government WQ A
seriously concerned to give equality of opportunity to women.
For the first time Australia has a national
government involving itself directly in the affairs of. our
cities. For the first time Australia has a government ready an
to give local government direct access to the national finances.
For the first time Australia has a nrational
government prepared to co-operate in renewing our decaying
urban transport systems. 27
For the first time Australia has a national
government determined to fulfil its con: stitutional obligationAa1
towards the aboriginals L
For the first time Australia has a government
determined to preserve, protect and enhance Australia's
national estate our natural and historical inheritance,
what we keep from our past, what we transmit to the future.
For the first time Australia Las a national
government which recognises the significance of the arts and
artists in our society. Our support for the arts has
released an unparallelled burst-of creativity in this nation. N. ox 
These achievements are just some of the fruits of
programs based on expert advice. . Je sought and obtained the Ow
co-operation of the most highly qualified Australian men and
women to enquire into and to report upon basic requirements
in Australia's social and economic structures. Tnese reports 5a4
are public. The work of these enquiries and commissions is
the basis of a continuing, coherent. comprehensive program.
The new initiatives 1 announce tonight are the new dimensions
and expanded fruits of this work.
This premature election means that these fruits
are being denied the Australian people. It has meant deferring
our entire legislative program. ' Oe have this legislation
ready to go; it is crucial legislation, and we have it ready.
We ask you to send us back to get on with the business your
business. In the Parliament that has been dissolved four
referendum bills had been twice rejected by the Senate. Under
the Constitution the Governor-General is submitting each of
them to the electors. Six other bills had been twice rejected
by the Senate. That is why under the Constitution the
Governor-General has dissolved both Houses of Parliament.
The Senate had also rejected nine other bills.
Some of them had been introdiuced a" second time. When the
Parliament was dissolved 24 bills were waiting to be passed.
The government will reintroduce all these rejected and
pending bills in the new Parliament. Also,* 107 new bills
have been already drafted and are awaiting introduction in
the new Parliament; a further 104 bills are being drafted on
the government's instructions.
I Our programs the programs you endorsed in 1972
had been developed over the previous si; x , ears. They were
published policies; they were debated in public; they were
scrutinized in Parliament. Time and time again as an
Opposition, we put positive proposals up for debate in
Parliament. By contrast our opponents have never since put
up a single proposal for examination by eitier Parliament or
the public. When they forced tnis election, none of us knew
anything of what they proposed. All we knew was what they
opposed. And that's really all we know now.
In defence of their wealthy friends and vested t
interests, they rejected the democratic principle of equal
electorates; they blocked attempts to democratise and modernise
the trade union movement; they denied representation in the
Senate to the people of the inorthern Territory and the
Australian Capital Territory; they sought ' L deny to local
government direct access to national revenues and borrowings;
they preserved for foreign mining iaterests the right to
exploit our of f-shore resources. -They preserved the inequity,
inefficiency and injustice of an anti{ uated healtA scheme.
They have prevented one million of our fellow-citizens from
having any protection against hospital and medical charges. 
4
By shelving the Trade Practices Bill they left
the door open to monopolies and big corporations to fix
prices, organise cartels and exploit the Australian customer.
By shelving the Ausralian ndustry Development Corporation
Bill they blocked the most effective instrument for ensuring
Australian control of our industries and developing new
industries. They left the door open to foreign takeovers and
foreign exploitation of the Australian economy. Yet you had
given us a clear mandate for every one of these proposals they
have opposed and obstructed.
These are the men who forced a premature election.
Now they are asking you to make a judgement affecting your
lives, your families and their welfare, your nation's future
for the next three years on the basis of policies cooked up in
the last three weeks. When they destroyed my government's
power to govern they had no more idea of what their policies
would be than you did. All they knew is that they were out AW
S to destroy the Whitlam Government. The Leader of the g
Opposition in the Senate admitted on the night of the
dissolution of Parliament " T'e embarked on a course some
12 months ago to bring about a House of Representatives
election". In the five weeks that the Senate sat this year
votes were taken on 43 occasions. The three opposition
parties combined to defeat the government on 42 of those
occasions. They had made the parliament unworkable.
What a spectacle This must present to the world
a world where everywhere democracy is under challenge. In
no other country in the world could an Upper louse, elected
3 years ago ' and 6 years ago, use an outdated majority, a
chance majority, to bring down the government elected by the
people only one and one-third years ag.
SAnd in Australia this had never been before
attempted by the Senate. Until our opponents lost office,
after 23 years, it had never even been threatened in the
Australian Parliament. One result of their actions is that for only the
third time in Australia's history, we are to have an election
for the whole Senate as well as the House of Representatives.
In addition, you will be asked to support referen. um proposals
to make the Australian democracy more equitable and more
efficient. REFERENDUMS The last occasion on which you voted for the whole F&amp; W
of the Senate and the House of Representatives was 1951. The
first referendum proposal is desicn-i: to avoid the situation
after 1951. Barely two years aftr the 1951 double dissolution
there had to be an election for h&amp; af the Senate ' and then a year
later a separate House of Representatives election. It is
quite wrong to suggest that the present dissolution of both
Houses of itself synchronises future elections for them. 4 
It does nothing-. of the sr. The-ehiections for the two Houses
will remain out of kilter' unless you accept our referendum
proposal. Australia has too -many elections. Since 1963 we
have had a national election every, 1j years. That is not
good for Australia. It does not make for good government or
for a healthy Parliament.
* Australia needs a period of stable government.
Australia needs a period of stable lecadership. we enter upon
a timne of difficult deci; sions. Such-decisions can * be taken'
* only by a united governme-at1 a united ' leadership, a united -Party,*
a united nation. Anid ou-r government alone offers such unity,
-Such leadership. We need a Parliament which re'fects the will of the
W people as fully and accurately as pom3ible. Our referen'dum
proposals are designed to achieve this.
-Our proposal to synchro-iise elections fo h-Senate
and House of Representatives was reccmmended as far back as-
1958t ye. a1part Contitution Review Committee establishd
under Sir Robert 21enzies in 195G. The second proposa. is to--
allow the Constitucion to be c-Ilt_ red if a m~ ijority of all the
electors in Australia approve anC ilsd a majority of the
electors in not less than one-half of th,! States; this
proposal was also recomaended by the Ct-onstitution Review
Comiteein 1958. The third proposal is that after July 1976
there should be equal electorates in the Uois!_: of Representatives
and in every State Douse of Parliament; thle inethod has been
perfected for the. U. S. Congress and State legislatures by the
U. S. Supreme Corurt over the lz. t 10( years; in Australia'it will
be applied by the High Court. The Sen~ ate o-pposed your having
a vote on any of these issues, eve, th-ose recommended as far back
as 1958. But where tha Senate tcerejects referendum proposals,
the Constitution gives you, peopl. e, the right to vote on
them regardless of the Scnates re-Jection-.---
* It is not i thoui-s. gpifi canc3 that our opponents
-used their -nui-ibe-Ls in the Senate' ock your chance of
having your say as -electo,-s on pronoSals to make Australia
a more stable deniocracY anid a more. iaqial democracy. Despite
their obstruction, you will1, at referendumns on the same day
as the elections, be able to. hav -_, our say.
Iknow that thesc matters require your thought and:
your time if you are to make a reasonable judgement. I ask you
again as I asked you two weeks ago, give close thought to
them and five minutes of your-time for the future of Australia
on the 18 N. ay. 
THE ECONOMY Ue Australians all now face together one of the
great historic challenges of our time; to make democracy
work; to make the parliamentary system work; and make it
work better. We share this challenge with most other
parliamentary democracies. Equally, with them, with all
major trading nations, with all mixed economies, we share the
problem of inflation. We are all seeking ways by which the
expectations, the wishes, the aspirations, the hopes of every
member of the community can be reconciled with freedom, good
order, security, stability. There is no simple answer, no
one answer, no easy cure. But if a solution is to be found
or even attempted, we need a strong, courageous, united
Sleadership. We need at the same time, a national leadership
passionately concerned about the preservation of the democratic
system and a leadership compassionately concerned to protect
the weaker members of the community. I suggest to you that
our government, since you elected it only 17 months ago, has
Sshown such dedication and has shown its capacity for firm and
courageous decisions decisions which were sometimes
initially unpopular, opposed by powerful interests, but which
have proved their correctness and which have proved the
doomsayers wrong. World events and the policies of -our predecessors
inevitably meant a higher rate of inflation in 1973 than in
1972. We have acted firmly to moderate these pressures.
s And these policies are beginning to work inflation
has slowed. All our efforts to curb inflation have been opposed
or obstructed by our opponents. Where we took administrative
action, they criticised. Where we took legislative action,
they obstructed. Where we sought more powers from you by
way of referendum, they opposed. Uhere we have sought
co-operation with the States, governments of the same political
persuasion as our opponents have failed to pass the necessary
legislation. SA1dministratively, we cut tariffs by 25% to. reduce
the price of imports without damaging Australian industries.
We have twice revalued the Australian dollar reflecting its
true status as one of the world's strongest currencies.
By legislation, we have tried to promote competition.
As long ago as 1963 the present Chief Justice Sir Garfield
Barwick pointed to the need to outlaw collusion between
corporations in fixing prices above their genuinely competitive
level. Last September we introduced legislation to do just that.
Our opponents in the Senate combined-' three times, not just to
oppose this legislation, but to prevent it from even being
debated. 6 
7
Only the Labor State of South Australia has
cod-operated in setting up land commissions to stop the spiral
in residential land prices. The average price for a home
site in Adelaide is $ 5,000 and has begun to stabilise. The
average price in Sydney is $ 18,500 and is still rising.
Not content with obstructing our efforts, our
opponents in their election promises now propose economic.
vandalism. Their policies mean soaking the average
Australian wage and salary earner. They mean cutting back
on opportunities for creative employment. They mean the same
sort of unemployment Mr Snedden as Treasurer created two years
ago. They mean the same rise in indirect taxes which they
imposed when in government they pretended to reduce income tax
in 1970. They mean disrupting our program for help to all
Australian schools. Their policies mean that once again, as
happened so often in the long life of the previous government,
O Australian children year after year will be set back in
their opportunities. When ' ir Snedden speaks of cutting back
on government spending he means cutting back on schools, on
health, on social security. They are the only fields where
meaningful cutbacks can be made. lhy should the children of
Australia, the migrants, the old, the handicapped, the sick,
the retarded, the aborigines, the disadvantaged groups pay
the price for r Snedden's economic fantasies? Let our
opponents say clearly, honestly, unequivocally, that their
weapons in the fight against inflation in Australia are. to be
the children of Australia, the aged of Australia, the
handicapped of Australia, the aborigines of Australia, the
disadvantaged people in our Australian community. For that
is what their policies mean. These are the consequences, the
undoubted consequences of their rag bag of proposals.
Forget their half--bahed proposals and look at the
performance their performance of obstruction in Opposition,
Stheir performance of mismanagement in government.
You will recall how for a disestrous week before
Christmas 1971 the then coalitioc* 9-g-.'-rnment nearly fell
a'part about the internatioual v. 1iue of the Australian dollar.
The Leader of the Country Party the man who wants to be
Treasurer, the man whose remedy fcr inflation is to double the
price of oil threatened to ., ilk out of the government
unless he got his way. And get his disastrous way he did.
Their division as much as their actual decision to devalue did
great harm to Australia in those days. Australia cannot afford
a repetition yet nri. thiig is m'ore certain, than that the
return of our opponents to government would mean deep,
unbridgeable and continuing division and damage on the matter
of the value of the Australian dollar. Division on such a
matter means undermining the strength of the Australian dollar
u 
8
Following the decision in 1971, this nation was flooded with
millions of dollars of unwanted foreign capital, capital which
sought to buy Australia up on the cheap. You must not allow
it to happen again.
This vast infusion of foreign money was one of the
root cauces of the inflationary problem which we have faced
ever since we came into government. The men who created
that problem now ask you to give them back the government.
The same men created the major economic prohierm much more
than an economic problem a social and huxian problem which
we first had to face when we came into government. It was
the problem of unemployment. The Budget of 1971 created
Australia's worst unemployment for 10 years. The man who
made that Budget, the Treasurer who presided over that
unemployment, is the present Leader of the Opposition. We
promised to restore full employment. We have restored it.
Every comparable country in the world shares the problem of
inflation. Ile are distinct from all those countries in this:
that in Australia alone, there is._ no unemployment; in
Australia alone, unemployment and inflation do not march side
by side. Our opponents by their divisions,, by their decisions,
started the new round of inflation in Australia. Yet
simultaneously, they created unemployment. And these are the
men who ask you to give them control over your economic-affairs.
V.. 
9
TAXATION The new prosperity our policies have created, the
restoration of full employment we have achieved, the rise in
wages and salaries has brought new problems, in particular for
the lower and middle wage and salary earners. It has created
a whole new range of problems and new inequities in the field of
personal taxdtion. In Septenber 1972 our predecessors appointed members
of a Committee under the chairmanship of Ir. Justice Asprey to
inquire into the structure and operation of the present
Commonwealth taxation system and to formulate proposals for
improving the system by making changes in it, abolishing any
existing form of taxation or introducing new forms of taxation.
The Committee was to have regard to the effects of the present
system upon the social, economic and business organisation of
the community and upon the economic and business organisation
Sof the community and upon the economic and efficient use of the
resources of Australia and to the desirability of a fair
distribution of the burden of taxation and of a system of
collection which not unduly complex and did not involve the
public or the administration in undue difficulty, inconvenience
or expense. The Treasurer, Crean, an:-I have had discussions
with the Asprey Committee, which will make a report to us by
I June. Its recommendations will therefore be taken into account
in this year's Budg et, when we shall be giving urgent consieeration
to the restructuring of the taxation system.'
In my Policy Speech in I! ovember 1972 I promised that
we would expand the terms of reference of the Asprey Committee
to include State and Local Government taxation systems and
Scollection methods. The Premiers of South Australia, Western
Australia and Tasmania agreed to coopel. te but the responses of
the other Premiers made it impossible for the Committee to carry
out the expanded inquiry.
Last month, however,. at a Constitutional Convention
standing committee which I chaired, it was decided that Commonwealth
and State officers should confer and report on the
respective occupancy by the Commonwealth, State and Local
Governments of the fields of income taxation, excise dutie2 And
sales tax, vehicle and fuel taxes, death duties and land and
property taxes. ' e shall be consulting fully with the States
on those items of shared taxation, such as death duties, on
which our officers are to report.
The Treasurer has already announced in Parliament that
the estate duty law is to be amended to e-tablish a Board of Relief
to hear applications for release from liability for duty in cases
of serious hardship. Such a Board has proved its worth in the
case of income tax. The estate duty board will be empowered to
release an estate from all or part of the duty payable where
ayment would impose serious hardsh; ip on a beneficiary or
beneficiaries and where relief granted would be for the benefit
of beneficiaries so affected. 
10
One aspect of estate duty is particularly unjust
the taxation of the matrimonial home. This practice constitutep
a failure to recognise the role wo; ien play in our society. The
person who looks after the home and the family contributes as
much to the economic value of the family home as the person who
goes to work. In estates in which the matrimonial home or an
interest therein passes to the widow or widower of the deceased
the value of the deceased's interest, up to a limit of $ 35,000,
shall be excluded from the dutiable value of the estate; the
prooortion of the value exempted from duty will be reduced by
2% for every $ 1,000 above this limit.
This is one of the very few completely new undertakings
in this policy speech. It will cost only about $ 10 million
per year but will ensure that no widow or widower will have
to sell the family home in order to meet federal estate duty.
The present income tax law allows concessional
deductions for dependants to Australian resident taxpayers only
where the dependants are themselves resident in Australia. In
Sthe case of a migrant who comes to Australia intending to bring
his wife and children out to this country as soon as he has made
Sa home for them, a period of 5 years is regarded as a reasonable
time for the wife and children to join the migrant in Australia.
If he maintains the family during this period income tax
Sdeductions for the dependants are allowable to him.
However, migrants who . are maintaining dependent
relatives overseas with no view to bringing them to Australia,
or who may be prevented from bringing them to Australia by
restrictive emigration policies in force in some countries, are
unable to qualify for a tax deduction for dependants. It is my
Government's intention to extend the provisions of the income
tax laws governing dependants' deductions so as to entitle people
in these situations to the taxation advantages availale already
to all of us maintaining dependent relatives who reside in
Australia.
SCUSTOMER PROTECTION The Australian Government has already taken
important measures to protect the -safety and economic interests
of customers. They include the 25% tariff cut and decisions
to. ensure cheaper colour television sets and radios. 7iTen
passed, the Trade Practices Bill will make safety stanrlrds
mandatory, and will require specified information to be disclosed
when specified goods an1 services are offered for sale.
Collusive price-fixing by corporations , ill he prohibited and
the protection of customers will be promoted through the
encouragement of a competitive climate in industry. Last year
we established the Interim Commission on Consumer Standards,
which has recommended that a permanent body.. succeed it.
We will establish a Bureau of Customer Protection.
The Bureau will ensure that consumer interests are properly
consulted and represented in all aspects of governmental
activity on consumer protection. 
.11
The PILu~ trali-in Coveri::. ent la~ hor9 tories twi 1 he
or inntJ~ LeLoward:: pro-luct T0i1 : tfwr esults Of suoch tests
b ie. e t u1 l. c.
MlEW STRUCTURES The greatest burden on the Australian economy,
the b~ iggest drag on our nr~ timnl prwosperity is the inefficient,
costly structures iLnheritted frcii L1.0 p&amp; SL. The great thieme of
our legislative program th~ e program now disrupted and deferred
by this premature electir) has ber; en one oi: refLorm and
renovation. Wie rccognise-d from i-he heginninq that thf.! ref'orms
vie wiere sceeking for Austra] izon socie ty -for a more -ju! st and
humane Australian society would be possible only through
reforms in the structure of tha government itself.
9 The accumulated dcadwocd of inefficiency of our
urban sprawl, uncoordinated local government bodies, too many
trade unions, obsolete communic at ions, archaic public transport
systems, lack of hospitals; where most people now live, our land
* use and abuse, the duplication of es. sentiail scervices because of
a misinterpretation of the true mcnaningy of fedUeralism, an
education system which until latyear never took adequate
* account of needs it is all these archaisms, anachronisms, and
inefficiencies which generation after generation, have built
into the Australian economy such-. high costs for such poor returns.
And this is precisely what we. hacvb attempted to reform and
restructure institutions and system,. s whose ine ffici~ erncy or
antiquity impose a tremendous buirden on th'c Australian economy
and the Australian Society.
The onsitution~ i~ a~ s~ " There shall bie ah
Inter-State Ccmrission". One2 of the first acts of the Menzies
Government in 1950 -was to repeal the act establishing the
Conssion pqc . oenmn n9-1: 21. o The
Government will re-estabis omsso h _ yhea r.
Vle hav'e completely * ccmoulelJle thoe epartmental
* structure of the Australian Governmcm! t. To qive2 organisational
thrust to our new priorities we -hfivo created new; depa--rtmncnts
Mlinerals and Energy, Urban and Regional Davelopnient, Ahoriginal
Affairs, Environment and Con serva tici and Horthern Devalopi nent.
We have remodelled and reinviqrritc'd othw-r departments and! ltave
amalgamated and are amalgamcat~ ln; st'L! 3. others. Vie Ihave, a rnoct,
efficient administration. Even r,. or e: important, the national
government is now equippe( 3 involve itsel-i-in new important
and urgent fields. In 1972 1 said:
'" We shall need the help and seek the helrh of the
best Australians. W'e shiall rely of course on
Australia's gireat Publ) Iic Service. tic shiall seek
and wielcome. ad ice arid co,--operatormbyn
the confines Canb , Xra':. 
12
To promote further the efficiency of the Australian Puh-Ii qervice
w; e shall establish a R~ oyal Cornnision. It will b; e headed by one
of PAustralia's most dTstin uished and experienced former public
servants a great servant of the Australian people Dr. H-. C.
Coombs. I have already announced, our acceptance of the
recommenda tions of Sir James \ lernon's I1: oyid Coi-miission on the
Post Office -that tl'ut Post Office __ snould-be I-: ndeyeuident of the
control of the Publ--i; cService Board. an. that a separate
Australian Postal Coiymiru~ iov' nd Au: tralianTeleco nunications
C ORnissron ( incor--Lc-rat iriq the 07ex seas icmuriain
Commtission) should be established. 1e( shill follow the same
principle in the transpurt fielld for the Australian
National RaiJlwa s, our: airportKri &amp; tcve' q oprations and,
~~ Lti wththe respective Statas, the Mewcastle dockY ardl andI.
We have armred the admi nistrative machine with new
capabiliti's -and new organs to c-a1 with the increasingly
complex and difficult problem's ofL planning tor the needs of -a
growing iridustrizl soci ety. Srme ofL -% he new~ bodies were given
permanent statutory form, slich as th-&amp; schools Commission, the
Social welfare Commission, T. he Isat and flea3. th Services
Commission, the Prices Jus t. fijat. ion Tribunal and the Pipeline
Authority; others ha-d tileir statutory charter utterly
transformed such as tho Grants Ccmn; si: on, the Cities CoMlission
and the Industries Ass; istance C ommission.-
Obviously, our newC Ldeirart-mc-n* Cs, statutory authorities,
the comnssions and enr~ uirij. es aL'Aisj. nci the Government and the
Pavlii-nenrt cannot oper: ate wvjti-iout staff, without advice, vlithout
qualified men and wvomen. Of crsthat costs money not a
cent too much, not a cent too soon. Yet for the sake of paltry
* short-teinA saving~ s, at th,-e pri. ce nf ). osing the timne and talents
of men and women who hav cr' te1rqcuctdy--
judges, academics, sta te pulcservants and businessm-ten, our
opponents propose -to thaiottlei These nmew activitieS; they . itend
to cut off the source of : 2xper t an(! pulic advice so essential to
any planningj for tLhr-. effoctivO,-ef , ficidm-t, mo! 3t humane andi least
exp:) nsive ways of decaling wit', A ustralia' s accumulated soCial an~ d
ecoinomic problems for the re-st of this centCury. . The fact is that
wie have to spend a little plan a lot now, in 1974 ife
are to build a decent, humane, efficient society for the
generations to come.
so we have begun 1Lasic andA quite massive reorganisation
of the s~ tructuLre-S wii-ch oerensUse. in
hustralia to carr:' out tic pol's ule This w. e propose
to continue to do. -In some 2: e/ Jrota YIy eCf'ucatioin, ' i&gt;
able to act immciatelyvf o-her fields, , e nad to ; q-ait for
moreD information and moze e; perL so weimmediiately sr-t
_ L~ ut getti-. g th-at advice ai-d, *. r. cru? ti-nc the ex). rts. I'II othc,:
fields, like health I , ot conrt btuL.~
Dat in all f ields and all levelIs, t. he wor'k goes on. It mnust ixit
Ibe interru. pted. It must not be disrupted. I utnth
dlestroyed. 
F. UCATI O1.1 The vdluc of the work of our new Comnmissi~ ons ancl
Committees of Enquiry have been great and continuingi. e
arnel. Cormmtltee on * Schools, now instituted as the ' Schools
Cormais Aon, has transformed the outlook for Australian
education. We have* almost doubled Au-stralian G over nmnt fqlr'.
on education. That money has beens distributed Z1CCo1! din-. J to
needs of all schools. Ile have assum&amp; ed full financial reop-: n0--
bility for tertiary education. Vle have. abolished fees for
tertiary and technical education. For the first-time qeare
giving assistance to teachers' colleges and pre-schcol teachers'
colleqecs on the saine basis as univer. si ties andl colle-,; es of
* advanced education. We are giving much more generous allowancens
to studE-nts and have more than trebled the nu.: iber of teaching
scholarships. The parents of Australia well know -and history
* will record that the greatest single achievement of our
* W Government in its first year was to change the face of education
in Australia, and to change the basic attitudles, of the Australian
people towards education. If we had achieved nothing else, iwe
would be remembered for this-that we buried once and for all
the futile and divisive debrate over so-called " State rights" and
" State aid" for s; chools. T. e not only freed vast amounts of money
f or schools; we freed the whole deboate on'education so that froill
now on, parents, teachers, and educcational authorities can engage
rationally in discussion about what is really best for our schools
what is truly best for our chilcdr. n.
Of course, many reforms st.' 1 remain to be made
within the Australian education system. The Schools Commission
is already conducting a study of those -_ rours not receiving full
Wbenefits their schooling.-the culturally dis~ advantaged
* child, the linguistically disadvantaged, the emotionally or
intellectually aisadvantaged. The greatest inequiity in the
* systcem ' how: ever, as the Karmel Cormm-ittee itself remarked, is its
bias ajainst girls: the fact that so few girls as compared to
boys sit for their final sc'-iooP &amp;; rWAS or continue into the
technical trades or enter the brofes:; ions. This is one. th~ e
major reasons w~ hy women are concentyr-ted in the less wjell paid
Jobs in our society. I have as3-ed the Commission to study the
causes of this situation and recomn. nd remedies.
1have drafted a bill to establish a C-urriculum
Deve) opment Centre. 
CHILD CARE The advice of the qualified and the concerned m~ en
and women now being made available through our commissions and
enquiries enables the Government to imlpleMent its broad vision
of the nature and purpose of education in a modern society.
Tile want not only to provide wider opportunities for education.
for a lifetime, we want to provide opportunities for a life-ti!. i-e
of education. Such opportunicties must be made available if
Australians are to be able to lead full and happy lives
rewarding to themselves and to the cOmmunity. In a society
undergoing such rapid change a~ s ours, the plain fact is that a
majority of people will changeterocptonmr hnoc
in their lives. Rcdundancy Is no longer the lot of manually
skilled workers alone. Few occupations are going to be left
untouched by the technological revolution.
In the next Parliament our big initiatives in
education will concern the care and education of pre-school
children, technical training, and adult retraining. The
foundations of our initiatives rest on work done by the
Social 11elfare Commission, the Pre-Schools Committee, * the
J'angan Committee on Techni cal and Farther Education arid the
Cochrane Committee on Adult Training and Re-Training.
There are at Dresent about 1.3 million children
of pre-school age. For more than one in four of these children,
there is no parent at hoi-me during wvorking hours. of these only
one in every 10 attends a chill care centre. A child in
Canberra has twice as gjood a chance Lf attending a pre-school
as a child in Victoria and four times as good a chance as a
child in Nlew -South OaJes. least 15,000 children aire left
totally unattendedi] durincj the day. Thousands more are left to
the care of brothers or sisters. Furthermiore, for too many of
our primary school childran there is , here to go outside of
school hours or during vacations. Too rf; any children begin
school with educational, cul tural. or psychological disadvantages.
The Government's Droqran for these children ) reflepcts
the recommenEtiers of the PeSho mitewhosceorot
was tabled last December, the Social 7elfarc conmmssion,_ Lpi; h
was established by ain act atVoHvaesidn iber, ar) d thr
Priorities Reviewz Staff. The. roiq ran will aa e"" elop
of services__ includingi the development of famnily dIay cr
diay centres, preschools, T~ tyL. O uis, outside of school care,
Li,, irqenc ard occasional care, todi-iers qrourns and _ y-tin
po4-ols. Pro-. ision will. he imi-Ade fo tof: care by relativl-S,
or hhors TheH scen! ill be diese and f lexib-le
troe cogn Ise d if fe r ent nie cd s o f dI f ' k: c-rent communities.
To encouragje the creatiiion of child care csnntres in
indrustry, ". 1es~ ai remove t1' e' Innr wt ip. Lrrcomc-Tax Act
w; hich' 1inipEdes the( tax dieduct-ibITity ofsedn--_ cm~ ne
on child care. 
15
Ve envisage that 50-0,000) children will benefit by
1.977 and that by 1930 all Australian children will have access to
local centres designed to take care of their educational, health,
psychological and other needs. All children, not just the
4 year-olds, whether cared for in their own home or in full,
part-time or occasional care, will have access to free pre-school
education. Child care servi. ces wil~ l be subs idi sned ith parents
contributinq to the cost aeoc~ oto their me~ ns, the inain
thrust of th~ e prograt in tFhefirst yer being to assist
disadvantaged children, it is esLimatedI that the cost of thi~ s
program in the first year a program of vision and imagination
based on a compassionate understandi -ng of the needs of the child,
the parent and the community will $ 130 milli-on.
We are determined that technical education shall
cease to be the Cinderella of Australian educationl. The reports
* of the Kangan and Cochrane Commiittees will provide an effective
and expert basis for hold new initiatives to allow technical
skills to find their proper and honoured place in a changing
society. These proposals represcnt a major attack on social
inequality. We have drafted a bil~ l for a Technical and Further
Education Comm37ssion. In March last yea r my Government appointed a special
manpowaer commission to study manpower policies abroad. Ne now.
Ppos1 e to am-lalciamatce all existincj5 -r iining chemnes into one new
National Emplo~~. 1ymernt arid Training ]? rocramu . wl oki
W s -6o-aoain-vi-t no movement and employer
organisations to identcify immaediate needs and to make long-term
projectioris of labour needs to meet the future demands of industry.
Ve will offer relocation assistance to those who find themselves
in regions or industries affected bjy economic, structural or
technological change. In the provi-sion of its training
facilit-ies, will give priority to persons affected by
changes in tariff policiesz anid th-ose m-ade ri-dundant by technological
change. N. E. A. T. will trinn ooron5p~ o rtunities for
all persons without discrimination on grounds of race or sex. 
16
Our retraining program will help ensure that our
present unprecedented growth in enployincrit opportunities cal).
be met and maintained. Increased productivity and our groving prosperity
depend upon our ability to make full use of the whole of our
available manpower.
STIdJCTUILAL CIX\. CFE
The Government realises that, in times of rapid
tectinological change a mechaninm is nceded to promote and
make easier the movoment of employees from one occupation to
another, from one industry to another, from one region to
W another. Accrdinqlv, the Governnent has decided to
introduce structural adlIustArnent assistarice to inci'viduals
WattY* ! fLVoyers. Indlivi~ duals, including~ sma~ l owners ant
rur i pro" W -C-3, s advecrselyrnj~~~ i~ l, structural ch? n r~ qo
3 1. C 0 1 f J, 1) 1e f q(-Ji(' ICC U MC) Mi 1,17.1i ' t-enance paRyment s,
raininq assistance and rc ocati7onq f rms
will be eliqi. ble f o r consultancy/ qua.-! antees
This scheme will improve the Xusitralian economy
in the interests of the consumer and will provide industry
with a better resource base and pattern of skills.
L 
.17
1iAIGTANTS We recognise the outstanding contribution migra-, nts
have made to our productk-ive capacity. Our primary conc(! rn,
8h ow'tvleever.-s, ai. ns d rocti titzheenisr. ecotlneo mhaicv e vhaleueq ibunta vthgeoiro hsadpip-n s ohsl
migrants ovrercclflie the disadvantage inseparable fromn life in a
new country. The number of social workers and welfare officers
x. orkf.': ng amongst migrants has been more than doubled. Sonic 1,500
special teachers 1vv'been employed in schools at 3atnrr
Government cost to give special tuition in ~ ni. hto 60,000
miqra-i1t ebldien, twice the number receiving it under our
predecessors. Provision has also be: en made f.-r emergency
classroom acc.. mmodation, For a. ilts-the numnber of specialised
courses intensive or accelerated courses, courses in industry,
3courses for women arid arrangemwents for onie-two-one tuition in
migrants' own homes has been developed or expanded,
Mligrants have responded and have demnonstrated a
new111 interest in ident.' fyling wit'. Austr:* lia. The number who
Whave beco-ye 72xUStrali. ay--iti011inS 1973 has increased by 48%
over-1972, ind the nun. bter returiining to their countries of
okigin has declined for the first timie in 9 vears.
* SOICIAL SECURlITY For too long Australia has demeaned herself and
mlli. ons ol. our followi-citize.. ns by the idea that those unable
to work, or to engage with full vigor in the xw. ork and leisure
Sof a vig.:-rous community deserved charity but lost their right
Wto self-respect and dignity.
' 1e inherited a system of social welfare based almost
entirely on the% concert of cash payments. We inherited a system
* whereby society accepted that it had fulflilled it~ r. oh~ ligat. ions
Wto the disa-dvantacjcd sections of the comnmunity onece it h
settled upon the leval of cash payments JFor tho! se dotoeid to be
in need. It was an easy way to fob off our coillectiv conscience.
It was a systefa which took litt-le ' real account oif true : ei
It was a systeia which did nothing at all. to provide its
beneficiaries o; victims -with a chance for dignity, a chance
for rehabilitation, a chance for taking a real place in the
living community. The Social W4elfare Commission has been established to
help the Government set goals for social welfare and to allow
the community to help determine these goals. The public reports
of the Corai: is ion serve as a standlard by which the comt:, unity
can judge the Government's decisions and performance.
Certainly cash payments for all classes of pensions
and welfare benefits have been sign-ificantly increased. 
Since taking office, we have increasedi age and invalid
pensions by 30% a significantly greater increase than the rise
in average weekly earnings or prices.
We have introduced a number of new benefits and
improved a number of exci.-ting oiien. Ne introduced the Supporting
:', others Benefit and the Or-phans Pension. We abolished the
discrimination of classes of widowys all widowis nowr receive the
same amnount. We, have increased the grants arid liberalised the
conditions for Aged Personr' Homes, th! 2 Home Care program and
Rehabilitation allowances.
Ile have proceeded to abolish the means test according
to our promised scheO~ ula.
My G~ overnment's ovar-riding concern, however, has
been to overhaul th: entire system so that Australia s-hall be,
as once she was, as she ceased to be in the coalition years, a
pioneer and a l. eader.
The TAustrAlian Assistance Plan has been established
to expand and enh,, ance, co-ordiix atte yet diversi f-y the activities
of welfare agencies, official anu' ; clunt~. ry alike. The Plan
places emphasis on th? neec'. for huirnr contact, counsel and
compassion as an adlition to cash payments. Funds on a costsharing
basis with ilocaJ. gover-. n-Rent; and voluntary agencies havre
beeni made availabla In 3.5 regions ohbt. A trl.
In 3.9' 5 the A'ustrcalian Gcvormmnt % ill-make funds
available und( J the Plan tovcy ejo. n u
NATIONAL COMPENSATIOM lie are ( ieter-. nin, 2d to place the security, the welfare
of those who suffer incapacity th; rough z:. cciden;-or sickness on
a sure and certair, ba:-is on t-he basis of confidence and freedom
from f inanc ial. a:' ix ety for tlhenms2 vc-s zand their famil ies.
Australians should not havie ton l. vc ini d1oubt or anricty lest
irnjury or sic] WC5Ss reduce oet! ~ eW hmw~ i ant to reduce
hardships imrpose_; by on(-of the great fi. ctors -for i~ nc. aliy -in
society irnequality of 2uck. Accor0. inaly, in arhl: 7
we established the National Rehabil itat ion and Compnr: satio2
Committee under the chairmanshi of-rl justice 7, ooahouse of th e
N~ ew Zealand Court of Apa. In rubi: uary its teram of reference
were extended to cov, the sick as wcll as the iLnjuired. It is
excpected to report zL the end of June.
N-y Government has dec . Ae-! d to irntroduvo a procjral to
help meet the im. aterial neeas anrl. vdtise the dignity o-1 homcL! Es
men -and wometi. 
Ca ita). r rants will be made available . q-or a
three-ear period to vo untary agecies, local anr~. a-i2r
authlor . tief; for cts such a~ s ngtsetrhses
daycetre a sapncYdTe ~ TTis c-and centres.
This is a program devised in response to a ic.
neglected need; it will be of benefit to the young as well as
the old. It will be of benefit to any person in inediat e , Cdt:;
to the permanently homeless, to the desierted or disturbed womThAiL
and her children, to the aboriginal or teenager in want or distr(-: s
to the battered woman or the battered child, to the singjlepan
in short, to anyone without support or an income.
NUHRSfING HOMES In keeping with the governmenit's commitment to proteuti! ng
arnd improving the position of tho sick arid the aged, the qoveriient
will suzattlyincrease benefAits paid to nursi. nq Fm din
to taKe iento account the increased COScs incurred. by nursi ncy huces.
In addition, an altcrinativc form of financial
assistance wl'YFFe of fered * to rTTeii cht. errriI~ ri~
I) T2I ne thje&amp; I* eIciIIpc) eot rUatxnqr
of these homes reclarding this arrangcment which will enale these
homes to improve still furtCher their stanidardis and facilities.
The ! Ainister for Social Security, Hr. Hfayden, wi) ll
announce the details of the proposals and other welfare mfuasure.:
in the goverpment's welfare pol icy speech in Djoeibourne C~ n
W~ ednesday.
HIEAVY i The government is determin, -d to fulfil its
constitutional responsibility ' for providin~ g ho!: pitcil b : rierfit anid
medical and dental services anid to give all Aistralians. access
to high quality health care at reasonclble ccest.
Our proposal for universal health iirisurance pat
you and strongly supported by you in the elections of 1969 and
1970 as well as 1972, was twice rejected 1, y the Sei*, ate. It wz:. S
among the measures on which the Gove rno.~ Generzal grantced t he--
double dissolution. it will therefore he one of the first
measures brouoht before eho alam~ t. i r tiLU
one mlfon_ Austraflans -are st1 l , otctaeqda iast hosoital
and medi. cal c-harges.
We will extend iuedial eefits Lo ; ovei: 1, hwJtat ions
with op tome t F~ sts. 
We propose to restore free hospital treatment established
by the last Labor Government in 1947 and abandoned by the 1ienzies
Government in 1952. ! tJe shall offer to share . with the States half
the cost of making_ hospital treatim: ent free in sitandard wards.
Furthcr, the national. qov'ernment is ite r epred
to build, staf f and operateflhospita õ li areas and regions now
inadequateLy served. ' ie havc alreadly approached the States.
We have offered to provide half the cost of building
and operating a new General Hospital in Launceston and wholly
build and operate a new womien'I s hos-pital in Hobart.
Ile have offered to construct and operate teaching
Wextensions at the Rloyal Newcastle Hospital without cos-t to
the U. S. W. Gov'ernment. In the last Budget we set aside $ 4 million to proceed
Swith the building of a teaching hospital at 1W. estmead,
WThough this project has bee(-n planned by th State governr1, c-nt
for silz years, that government has i. nformoed us that they are un1able
to spend the mnoney' we have provided. our offer still stands.'
The money is there. It is up to the State government to
use it. Ile shall press on withm the establishment of commuunity
health centre~ s, Te ihate and
loaloverninents. The Australian school Dental Scheme will be expanded
to cover all rilnary scoo lddrnb
We shall institute a dornici liary dental servefo
thed tosev 7 OO Ooplhe~
a cost of 600,0OO anmmual. y
Ile shall reconstitute thie Commonwealth Seerm
Laboratories and estc hTFa Phaxin, it~ a3d. C, iii ion to -es arch
.( and w holeo; ale di-1gs th u~. feslnsrcmkJ) 0_ a
bythe Vernon floyal Com! wissio F~ or the Ps fie
CITIES In all. these matters in education, social security,
health we have had these great objective.;: to reduce inequality,
to promote equality of opportunity, to make the system itself
rmo re efficient and equitable. 7, J1 ther~ ain 3 aire comnbined in
the biggest new effort my cjo'i-evnt has mido_-in our qreat cities,
in our growing centres all around AUStralicz. At last Australia
has a national governmclnt reparc-d to i nvolv e it-, sel f i~ n the
* affairs of the places where m~ ost. Au ~ txraliant liVe: our citieS
and our centres. 
21
We have recognised, as I said in 1972, that " a
national government which cuts itself off from responsibility
for the nation's cities is cutting itself off from the nation's
real. life". In its direct involvement in cities the Australian
Government has entered the mainstream of Australian life. That
new involvement has been central not onl. y to the affairs of
the great majority of Australian people; it is central to our
relations with State government and local government, Pie not
only want to remould, modernise, revitalise our cities; we want
to remould, revitalise, rnodernise the relations between the
three levels of government national, state, local. tl. have
involved the national governmen~ t in matters w . hich previously
were left to the States or not done at all. If they were left
to the States,* they were too often done inadequately, or not
done at all. If left to local government,. they were too often
done inadequately, finaaced unfairly or not done at all.
0 In this field we have had some examples of splendid
co-operation with the States yet equally we have met some of the
worst obstruction f rom the States.
The Albury/ Uodoiga agreemennt. to create Australia's
first large centre away from the seaboard since the found.' ing of
Canberra has been a splendid example * of co-operation. . Je have
also made agreements with the States for new growth cent)-es,
finarice for sewerage and grants for urban transport. It would
have been unheard of until 1972 that an Australian national
governinent should involve itself di rectly ip regional development,
s-ei\: eracge, urban.-trcunsport. Because previous national governments
even with all their atonopo ly over the really big and gro..,; ing
sources of revenue, w-, ould not involve themselves, nothing effective
* was ever done about c~ ecentralisation; our great cities had the
largest unsewered areas of any comparable cities in the world;
and our urban transport systems were app&gt;-:, a ching breakdown. Of
c~.~: cit hats been impossible in so short a time to reverse
the trendis rc-. salting from decades of neglect. But we have made
a J nnn; a rtbainic
LOCAL GOVERNIMENT Yet crucial to making a good continuationi andl a gcod
culmination of these efforts i~ s the role of local goveroi. cnt'.
And it must 1be sai. 1 tChat our efforts to raise the status of
local govern~ ment and to give local government direct access to
th1 nation's finances have met with scant co-operation from
state governments. Ie huave sought to wake local government a genuine
vlrtrtner in f~ ha ; stc T liñ. rvi c. '~ ll1: the
Gtants Cou.~~, a~ llot; 1.-. Cal j0-v'-L'r1JTIent bodies to make
submissions and t allow the Cormission to ma ke recommrendations
on the amounts of ri,. nay needed to rek-1tce inequalitjes between
regions and within States.-as traditionally it used. to do as
between the States,. 
-22-
The role we assign to local governmenit is the real
answer to charges of centralismn. Under a variety of programs
we'have provided local governm-ient with the funds to undertake a
range o activiti-es previously inadequately carried out or
totally neglected. The Auistralian Assistance Plan, the programs
for community health, area imp--rovemnent-, the national estate,
the arts, tourism and recreation a d aborigines all these
provide funds for commrnunity activities to be orqanised by local
government. We deliberately have made and shall make local
government a vehicle for our lcgislation on aged persons' homes
and hostels, sheltered employment, han-dicapped children, mea ls
on wheels, home care and nursing, nursing homies and homeless men
and woi-men. These are all activities which cannot be close],,. y
regulated from the centre and are best planned and implemented
by local government workingq with local communities. They justify
assistance fromn the nation'Is finances but not increases in rates.
W~ e insisted on local, gover-nment representation' at
the Convention on the Constitution in September last year~. We
made local government representation a condition of part iciJ-pation
by the national government.
0At that Convention I put the case for local govevnment
representation on the Loan Council.. The States' Premiers then,
and at a special Premiers' Conference in Octolber, turned down
our proposal that local governiment should have a voice vid a vote
in the Loan Counzcil. Tie forhreferendum now boc": ore you will take the
next crucial step in raising the status of local governriepnt. It
wil. l enable the national government to make grants direct: to
local yoenetbodies, if they wish, zand to borrow m,-oney on
* their behalf, if they wish. Only if this is done can local
governmtent acquire reasonable access to '' le nation's finances.
Only if this is done can local governmenz carry out, the increasing
responsibilities and bear the increasing . h-urdcer-s vyhich federal
and state governments alike iimrpose upocn it and which the p.-eople
* need. Only if this is done can inequality between regions be
reduced. It remains true, as I said in 1972, that more anid more
the standard of life of the Australian citizen depends not
so much on how much hie earns but % Z1tre he lives.
URB3AN TRANSPORT We are providing $ 31 million this year to the state
governments for urban public transporL.-improvement. We are
proosinqt2p1ovide another 141 mil lion to coi : pet FrIc~ ts
CUoimn 1N. 9ths Y. Half the morie y haF, been allocate-d for the
tion of new railway rolling st~ ock, buses andtr: s
Other mcjor proje( cts loeing assistecd include
quadruplicatioii of the railway line lhcatween Granville and Penrith,
construction of a number of acdditioi... 1 tracks in N'elbourne to 
-23
relieve congestion and increase the capacity for express services
operating to outer suburban area!-, and electrification of urban
rail links in Brishane andl Adelaide.
From as far back as 1907 each mainland taegove~ rnment
has from time to time-consented to Che Commonw,. ealth Government
constructing or extending railways in its state; these railway's
have always been country lines and have usually involvedC State
expenditure. Last February my g-overnime,' int sought. the M. S. 14.
government ' s consent to construct a railway in the metropdolitan
area, to be constructed and operated without cost to the N. S. U1.
govern-iient. The railway system we scek to construct will radiate
from )? arramatt1-a to Hoxton Park, Castle Hill andf through Carlingford
to Epping. It will allow the i~ ntr. oduction of the best contempnorary
* Signalling practices and carriage sets.
I have told the Premier -that we wish to Provide funds
in the ne." zt uqe heeimc: Lntof-E; ntrC tioi and -the
0ECo rol I~' stoCK
1131 S 1.1G Wrec ogise too that wher-n Australians live is le: s
and* leS a Matter Of truly f ree choicee, but a matter of the
availability and price of resideiAial land. I regret to say that
here agaitn, in our Ce2forts~ to hoJ. d down the pi-ic-e of lizntd, we havke
mnet State goverrnm'ent obstruction. Frum-, the -timue we tooK office
1; e hAve been negotiating with the States to es. tablich land
. friCnogretmsi ssi ons to clear and develop lanei at new centres or On the
of existingl cities. The Commrvissions, by selling
buildingj blocks at'a fair pri~ ce, twov! ld help dampen spiralling
land costs. They would alslo be a key to better town planning. In
the larst B~ udget we allocated $~ 60 million to be spent over two
years by the land coaaissions. Only one State the Labor State
* of South AustL-ralia has so far pa-ssed. the necessary lecjisl&amp; a'ion.
The foL-mer Labor Administration in !( estern Aii7tralia pass!, ed the
legislation in the Legislative Asseinbly, only to have it rejected
in the Upper House.
lie have found the housing problem one of the most
difficult of all our inheritances fromn the previous government.
During the two year: s prior to Deceniber 1972, there was a miassive
growth in money supply within Aust-ralia and vast sums were
channelled to the housing industry for private dwellig
con struct ion. The result of this was that the housinrl industry
became grossly over-extended, long delays occurred in the supply
of materials and labour to building sites, construction times
were greatly extended and excessive cost risQs became the order
of the day. Public housing-proqrairs-for which thle government
provided a record assistance of $ 21l8.65 million in .1973/ 74 were
not being fulfilled because of the demand for resources in private
housing and other building construction. 
-24
While maintainInc all our efforts to-rc. over from the
position we inherited, We pro, ) oso fur~ ther nieasures; to reduce
housing costs and the burden of ;' igfor a house.
A major proc id al-uadcy, r am3; en Launched to produce
a uniform housinq code and '. cmmwdp.-cacticcs for dwellinig units
of various types ranging. from hiJh' te med11WL andi low density
housing. This is aime at_ sip aynnd rational ising inany
of the unnecessarily complex and non--st. Drila~ rj ic, ms; whiich ad~ d
unduly to housing costs, and x-Aich do not conL) ibutc! to thle
quality of living.
HOUSE INTSURANCE The government Jis determine6 to civc home--owners the
opporuun3. ty to insure their propcrties, for lower prcinium,-s and
against natural s T ~. 1Jh JVq( 1C
introduced on I f[ chr)) uiary u s ' VIi' iA r21-osr, L
favourable than those se t hOy i SUJ1: c2]: t t111: h1 t: 1k DI.,, XG:
Service HIomejs i u~~ eshiv . r : evrIg~* A
wider ccover than oi-. hcr inuiors ~ c
have come to realisc.
AccordIn-nly Lhc tjvny. n: I isn Au'. itral IJ trz
Gove-rnmient InsuranL: j~ 2 f. e
forms of insV raflc(* hIlcA'm 2, ii~ i'
UI.;-diJS tjcs; e1 oCe) r fo:-no,:~ t~ IIe:
TiFn1RS i I : J Tofc
P~ e will heltp new-,. hiome bye to rearrane their
mortaq( e repmon-._ 1111Tcsrcr andI the( IinisLer fo): Housing
willrhave early dicussicons \/ il: h the mrajor ) c: n3. ing institutions
* mono rttghaigse mpaatltmerc. n t3 Osuor itnhha-te nyt-o'uonnri c is tom hc.; I~ rn. easw lr , arrangcpmayc erliet sso fat
a time when the cderiands5 on their . iJncoPme arc-1igche-t. nI hrc. 1in
to pay more later i~ n life whea .' h) iy are-be. ter able tc) ov
higjher repayments. We are thoroughly aware of the burden interest rates
impose on those buying their cown home, particularly-young married
couples. Ife are determineC. to cEac t-hat burden for those in
in my _ 972 policy spehT unoertook that until
i~ anteer et cn h~ edued a ~ hor would introdue
a scherie of tax deduc-:_. bility for hom-. e i; Itc-' c! i-. s payments. All
ta) payers -wh! ose act~ oal incon or belo-7 wilil be entitled
to dedu~ ct 10 0 of thi r intclsc i e AVMinctS. r'iwi vercentaqle
JJEtoti interest nam2t 7V74hiutYS will e reduced
Py 1% for evei5 100 of ic;: in e o of , Gco. r1hat c-~
as I announced 4i. n rebruacry 19.74 is 6ue to no into &amp; f: t . i. n*
of T fh. The legiTs4a Lion hasJ T The~ d schemed 
II
will provide direct tax relief inot&amp;-only for now hiome buyers, but
also for nearly all those %-whc arc: at present paying~ off their
homes. ENVIRONJIIENT Increasing. 1 lh.' z rntoisWvce come to see the relation
between thleir oti'ri hornres h i thr: i.* i ', 70MniLi. ens an
the Whtol;. AuStrillian retn . tt h. 7 j r! q(.' nei:! tion of
Australian.; to tt ( eoest" h:. e 3:. 1c n Yrwls
bex-, weefl oro. wth aidpe3v: i nof tL-he-fliu:~ rmc~ t
govextr-~ 1~ 1~~ ri~~ r~ nt.~ 1A C! I--st CAI, 1) d2d.
to cnsiirL iiha t. crov. th andr jr iC?] Yr: ce nut boiiqhl a t the price
of the dl(,.; ruct. or of thuntio'~ n~ tur-al. and hi!; to'zical
inhe): i4-ZnCc . ICW-h( e, jCv thlat. The polluter must riot future
generations of Aus-k-raJlians.
One of my fir3st-actionsE vat-to* confer with the P r crm i es
of N. S2-7. Vi". ctoria and S: outh st;&gt; ialja on thu fEunctions of the
River Iurray Conw. is-, ion, which have been virtuially un: hanqjed for
years an~ d which are now LuAeJnd2ua to sa feguard the
urban and rural. u~ ers of aqlcreaiate' st1 waterway/.
!, le have Cbt r nictf1Protection Pill
yprovidinqc fon vilo. m1;" I1-~ i il
on them."' I have r po:. e. 1t t1' c yli oH enLr 1 I
impact statents ce. -ilr ;; r
Tr i a,, Z 770. e e5 r ch; t Eli-I
-r 31 o 1~ uI Ti7r'o~
T 1: r to hePm3r5that joint
invo. lvinq X003 -1-s Iit6o 77 õ QJ CA: G~ 0
Corrmittee. on Inciuir-" The Con-. titu'Lton c ivos the Australizin
Government power 4to corit:-ol th-. ey~ port of goods and, in particular,
the export of innerals and t:': imicr. It cai, requi-re that ith
satisfied that the exp) oitcitio of mincra or t.~ c eor~ S
or the manner or -zxterit of tliat e-. ploi1: ation, w! ill. not adversely
affect the environment hcfor-. QV1. iriq(. a toeseeLc port." Otr
. gp\ ernmcflnt will. excrci~ . bs j'mo roqjulaYrly arnd effectively
on the basi. s ot ski:. ilrd and . in~ herc., dnt ilvice.
' Je have drafteOd a National Parks andl 1 Jilcdlife-
Conservation Billi. It wi). l eea. ih~ ilationil Park: s and
Wildlife Commission " 71 Y'iTQhC: JCT e, on a 1
parks, includin such arts a ffuhe ret rr r ( 6
tieJntral, Austral. an71Tre -thcxut' La AA ps an( e
vacatd dncfenc in s ie y i ian Po P1% i-T i
The Governmrnnt ':. rethexotof i tiruts of
kangaroos and relat-d ,;. ecjps. It hi 6ti-' I~ l ii I~ 1th
internM-. i-, il . X4TL7omil1Aty as: Ote t; e irport-ance
of wildlifie cozii.: rvat. 6on. aro . o inccatc : othe i~~: es thlat . it iS.
not siit i., fied with t. 1 l of itni -armniiy in their. approacb. t
conservation pro: 7ram3 for krA:~ s 
26-
FORE~ IGN CONTROL OF RESOU31CES
The national estate belongs to all Australians.
We have accepted the responsibility of the national government
to help protect it arid preserve i~ t for the benefit of all
Australians. Equally, we have accepted our responsibility
to protect Australia's resources ' S thtIecfrh utain
will have a greater share in the control and ownership of
their own resources. We have tried to stop the gre at Australian
sell-out. We have tried to help Australians buy Australia
back. In these aims we have met unrelenting obstruction from
our opponents. For years the Australian Labor Party advanced
the idea of the Australian Industr,-y Dc velopment Corp~ oration
Sand in 1972 undertook to expaiid iLs activi-ties: to enable it to
3join aith Aun'L-ralian arnd foreilgr companie-s in the discovery,
development and proces sinq of Austral ian resources. Eight mon ths
ago we introc2uced the legislation; the Senate stalled it.
Con. 1 anion legislation for the National Investment Fund had tlhe
* Same fate. Through this fund wo intend to holp ord~ inary
Australians invest in the devc,.' pwm nt of thei~ r own re,-_ source~ s
and industries instead of subuidising to the tune of millions,
foreign investors and nmulti-n~ itional corporations. T' e F.
will raise f unds by oprtn
for the g&amp; Yc_, q-( iCp ublic andl by LferiiL3-v erjtC: n investi~ ent
bonds to both~ irivate and i~ Lt* inl: n~ ios
Further, the Senate twice re-jected the Pe-trol and
.1inrals Authority Iill. Th1is is designed-as our basic
instrument for ensurinig dcveloprrent of our energy and mineral
Sresources and to maximise thec ownership and control. of th. CEse
W resources by 1' Australians. It was another of th~ e me,_ aSures'-on
which the Governor-General yranted the double dissolution
and it also will be Yrmtbyebfoocrhet the new Parliament.
Our opponents pattern. of resistance to measures
Wdesigned to promote Australian ownership forms part of a
pattern of encouragement of foreign ownership they set when
in Government. The great sell-out occurred when they formed the
Government. They are still the apologiists for forcei-. n ownorship.
Their return to office w~ ould agJain olpen iw. ide the door. As a'
result of thieir policies, 68 of our cnerm' resources are
controlled overseas. just how wide our opPonients opened t ' he door
is now being revealed. T * he Departrent of H'inerali; and Energy
set up by this Government has now received a thoroughly
documented and impartial report on the mining industry
the Fitzgerald Report. 
-27
Ausralansnow know for the first time the exteat to wich they
have been suL-sidisirig mining invustors.. riainly foreic ncorporations.
The profit on their operations for the las.-t 6 years
was $ 2,000,000,000. Our prodoccs-lori3 developed a syste m of
taxation concess~ ions so generous to these struggling corporations
that the Australian taxpayer gave*' 3100,0 in subsidi-es and
concessions. But the comcpanies paid only $ 28361-in tax. es an-d
royalties, $ 55 m~ illion less.
We have been paying to be TThie~ oti
Fitzgrald orwc lJ tfe sti tr tiriq poAit fcnr L. formutlation
C~ fpoicusai med at m: 1Li; qtn-e" r tAur~ i to ziu~ trali a of her
natural en.] o,; 1xlat or-mineral and ec-kerj wealth.
__ We will. conitinue to pursue v wih vrigour the surveillance
Vof all foreign takce-over pro~ posals for shares or: assets of
exitin Zutralian compaies. kWe have. estcablisheC[: u' e ine
of new foreign invostmervt proposal1s for wn c"" h e eiiceC1lLC
approval i~ s reci~ red. We haveq n~ It' I a c~ t* f1O LO
certain industries Austr3 3 i iiIiL: U. i
institution. s s; o -"-ere is 1itt 1c! advad. ' t;': 3Ce J1in CJ Jowiflcy C3itoDCJ
institutions to Lbe cstablisicd inte. rcists. This is
parti. cula:': ly thie case in the 2je). d of int-urarnce. In the iareza
of m~ neals we have, indicatedC clearly that it . is our ob-i cctive
to reduce the extent of foreign owner-ship a~ nd con trol and
to rnaxiu. se Ausit-ra~ lian contCrol), parjjticujjnr. y of onerq'~' resources9p
FurthurmoreC we haestpp d thec I-u of Autr~ l~ nland,
andexhage onro. ppro~ ial for foreig inCaIl~ v~~ ni
estate. hzas been Iimrited.
T he G vrieie tn t' ii 1 wa . I
ii.( 1 3 il -e 1)*-Th-' afli.-
p. 1ocgsS of fo),-e ion andne'c: v
CC8: fl ng proC: 5~ i un Cñ e o-oi.~ r ci. o, L OF tftlh 1:
will e c 1 to dCVeP Io' p0 r f'hI'f " k 0l1~ kii i. iiflI:
areas oft c;: port fxrc~~ I J~ w
i L. 11C-f 0 ( yJ d) utLTlhe
world ehcccjv rit.~ td4CA:! hd
* thie resources policies of the t iw G
met that test triunphant). y. We have no int,-nti on % fia1.:: ocver
to use our possession of vast res: Luarces to 9g:. ng up against
* the resource users. I e stand ready to join with oth-, r nations
in search of solutions. ue recog-nise the interdcpeiidcnce of
our economy and our prosperity withi our great trading partners,
particularly Japan, Northern Amrica anc! Surope, We are,
however, determined that our resources command a fair price
in world markets, This we arei achieving. Througn export controls
and . discussions with exo~:;. h'Oirrei: h--. obtained higher
returns for exporters. 
For the first time an Australiai cjovernuiont has U'sed its authority
to reinforce the bargaining power of Australian exporters. We
shall not sell our re.-Dources on; thec clieap.
Australi~ a has emerged az: s one of the world's ene7rgy
rich countries. . chave,; mn~ murm dc4; pen] Ence on imports of
heavy crude oil and we have been amo. ingj the countries least
affected by escalating crude oil prices overseas.
To obtain advice on hoe this situation can lbest be
used for the continuing bc,-nefit of aill !' ustralians the
governmtent has set up a Royal. Corcimssion under r~ r. Justice Collin.-s
to enq. uire into all a-spects of petroleum products, refining arnd
pricing. Further, we ap-proved lastC year the creation of a
Pipeline Authoarity to provide for the transmission of natural
gas by an interstate pipeline ' stein. Thce f irstsag h
National Pipeli-nc Sys tem -Jill link Sydlnuy to the Gidgealpa fields.
It lst iatlyproposed th-at the pipe) line will continue to
Palm Valley. Inv~ w of t'lce cj-i. ical onerrm-s) horta( je in
Weten st~ ia aTZjo int ormw~ ithS! aL study is uinder way~
tov al~ Letho feas ibil1it,' nf pipel-3ine l ink hn-_ twecri Palo, Valley,
R z 1 c r-* i Pert. 1-and3 the 11Ftura1_ q3U-c~ ds on the ortl--cst
The Australian ( Jovternman t is working closely with
the Wecstern Piustralian Governmant on a studly of a ma. jor industrial
complex in the Pilbara baseC. on the utiliza-tion of the ' abundant
suppli -s of natural gas, iron ore and salt in the reolon.
The rellort wiJlprovde the aS: fi or decision on our f-uture
r1o. e dveo~ : iLol. tij-e iIt will. bo reLaay in June.
P RrIiA RY INDUSTRIES
SAustralia' s future as an ex-porte-r rests increasingly
upon o-ur newly discovered imincrcii. re! zourccs. The farm sector,
however, rem-iains and will. long remiain fundamentally important
to our trade, fundamentially impurtant to Australia's pr-osperity.
My colleague, Senator 17riedt, the Mlinister for
Primary Industry, will c. lelivcr the governlment's rural policy
speech in Coulburn on .' ed: nesdl-y. 1l.-t me, however, outline the
Government's general. approach and record.
Eost Australian farmers this year have enjoyed
unexampled prosperity. The avrac jrit income of Australia' s
190,000 rural holdings this year is about 000. Tne average
for the previou5 6 years was less than $ 6,000. Our policies
have contributed in no small measure. In particular, we have
sought aid! to farmers to take the hetadvantage of present
favourable conditions to obtain new mnarkets. We want to encourage
industries whicha have solid, l-png Lerm prosi: ects of selling their
products at a good return to the farimer. 
-29
To this end, we have viqoroiirlv expanded existing
mnarkets and opcncd newi one(-s.
The Tr-ad'e agreemenmt withA Pe~ cISh IO~ Cof China
is onl~ y th-e most and novel. exoam'. 1e. lk. tlhii li term'Is Of
this Aqireement iih-i:. a ocrter coitract kavec . n 1.1nre
f or the supply of Aust; ra-lian vheat and sugar to Ch in a. Tt -is Ibeyond
question thiat the q'efrnl-inent Co,* China '. 111 honou-ar a~ ou~ Jya
agreement, noe-c-s . oliiica. a: oscmltL~. e ~ d
re). ajons Our prko: N.. ot: ecrcg I., f. n o' the Pjo ~~~ ulc~ asww
iadis-putably a signific nt -7ator: in th2 wrt) v Vd 3, U
ri~ rt with whic,' .) oth f; Ades negotl. aze h f&amp; e2c~'~~
In addi-tion, t're P . us':, alianG overnment has roached a
new levl1 of 111&amp; rstr. dJrcj : n trz'.&amp; o w%.. th Japc'-7n, thv Pacif~ ic region,
eastern Europe andI the S;; vict-Union.
We have Is2i30 Acts fo,-r the rtcco and
Sreconstruction of prixi-iry industry i~ n genera.. aind for S; nCh S)) ciU
industries as wool; Wfl(: at meatr eggs in-m-, honey ap õ ' les andper
ile have drafted 16 bfiil~ ls~ nitrogeioow; fci-ti.. z
subsidiEs and v.]; e( at stabi lizatiion and~ For thc! sugar.,~. yx~
* pig-' farming, wool, canned fiiP.&amp;. ts and a'canc! pear i. nustries.
Although our vineat; tiJ.~&amp; n. plajn was edre ru:.
by the itsr3~ lhaa. h;* nwbripJlacod
in jeopardzy by the new llo-tarn. Am; tC-ra. ian ocrme.
pro~ uer Miy coverninent-ocd~ ie or~ tns of priimiary
cmpajnlvs -1) bout h-' cji-i tcIDf.~ y re. ducing tariffs
by 25% across the Bouard weshall. savu prirr. a-y produicers att least
$ 100 million this fina: nriaj. yors:.
The Tarii~ f Poare, oas i~ e succ-eeded h't~ he X( nelstrj-cr
A~ ssistancecormsox on i ash J re
Si~ r John Craw-S'ord. A'thouiq! i thi e L3Ax ta0 t. ric ULrst
tailoe enale1. s ( gToJvun nat to) 5. ud m: ia v~:
on assistance fo0--i~ x tto oni a bq. r1asis, the
COuntry Party in Doouhs es~ ilgei s: S the * ijiil es--ta. blishing
it. I havo ale a s! C&amp; ithz-. OQ co. x rc,. or-t
prom~ oti On and rae hand riuct r on cbl23 ~ c; x
OaL : y and qoi d-' uKiningj2PU and toi~ d~ r~&gt; i~~. a
;&gt;, lanxis f -: rm rs.
The(,, governiment is awaj. ti nrj rc:; ort Afrom a o ite
o ~ hchE~~ h7 Ca; fod saISo nb) or. tep~ . p
Tlmrdc. kiri andl Doci-, D'; I'Arml~ s 
FLOOD__ ITiIC." TIOW
Tha recent d-isastrous floods in. Queens land have! amply
deoions t rated the nec~ d for a positive, co--ordinated nationali
approachi to f lood mitigation. jer. onally invited the Premr
of ) ue-: n. s land X suDi-. tit__ a S Ltie-wide panoji floo-d Iiticration
as tlie basis cii Con-3: lcerat ion for Austra'li'an G~'-: r. tassistance.
We rooethat anve.-A fl. c-itiqaion schemofi fov
1Livsoir : ' s shoul. d b! e__ d ta co-or. crc&amp; i'v&amp; ly'b_~ e the
Aiir. a-ralian, Sta La ar local coverwY : nS as jv.' 1
in.-the case of Nov. () Lltll WaJ'tles.
I contr.;-: 2t tl-ii. cc)--operativc appro:, thnis national
ap) tocCh wqit. the attitude of the present Leader of thc Country
Party jhc n 1) told tL--he_ 11ou sro of eprezc~ n tz. tives on 1,16 May 19), 6 3
' Th-problem of flood miticiat-_ oni rcst-~ s.-paarely on State
( Govc:: rments The. pres Co*., monvealt~ h R~ id 7. ads Act expi-res at
the end of Junec. TeBureau of Poads-impa-e a report to assist
the goverrnmunt in consi4dering final-1 * ci-al ass-Istance to the States
for the ensuing pc~ r-: Lod. TjiC Pliniste-r for Trai-spozt tznled 1te
reot last DocevIber. Discussions have since enhedwt
the State-s and also0, -for ' Che firct tLi-c, Lut ina accordance with
the* t, Bureau' s recommecndation, vy., Ath Local -o'. rwn autNioriti-s.
These diacussmons will be r'? sumed af~ tcli the e:~ ections.
ivleanwhile t!) e qovernment has ~ eiddthat it will
itself Pre.!. ' n the con ~ tru. ctio ofLa a na Li. onaLI roal
systa in t: Iiose areas \ wichi iiwth7 ow Cnt. J. i t.. i fn
repniiiies., ti 1Vr12ft'~ ~ Qrrpni)~
the whole Cost of Ol trOitjigl anl d ii tainlncf the i. ncxa.
road -hne. L ~ eaia~ 7r
-inter ests ofl S~"
SccC nriuy a ncw; 4 -1cuic diviLdedhqwc needls t te Y' vc
t nc GItJ'~ L( oal) bn ai. d irok pTsis inc : 1OU'
j'. mu t a': dBatlo and-~ comng cl.. ose t1o Ccanburra it will recuce
L:.. roa.-d () istanc. e bctwcen Sycin-y and i ~ 1o, u r ie by 70 miles.
The~~ m ~ twii Ico lq inL h ic ,. tzte and local govurnment
authoritio. s on the prcise-, routo. 
S&gt; eccnc'lv, the ooverroentc aill1 take epos. iit
for the whole cost-ofotot 4&amp; i1 ilrsqui~ c
These__~~~ ucflihe-nrte rcroads ( ovecrthenext three \' ears
_ poo-m~ ioli yc'lln and 23 ilo
on the, FIItzroy r s iq-! rdia ro . tj in Ues toW71Z ra ri d
oteu a oianng mines to i; naodr. u ~ ca roc i~ s
. to mjocr sea and air termi).-als.
Thirdljy, we shall make special povA. son fur roads
between Canberra and nej. crhhcur incJto in 1lew r-; OuItlh W-ales
and betwccn. thez-Northiern Tr. tr&gt; cIthe~ tl-re surrouing
SEA TRAIISPORT We have appointed Mr. M' 1lCOlr SuM2! ie r the former
secretary of the Department of Tran.,: port, cas a Royal Coi-, if'iisioer
to inq1uire into the M1arit.-Ie TIndustry. Ei~ s wilcl~ t e h
foundation of a coiqlete x-oderni:.; ation of the laws cover. ig our:
ports and our coastal and overseas trade.
Vie are particul~ arly awarc-. of the burden placed on
the Tasm,, aniai ecorio! my and on Tasnaiinm by their r-elijance on sea
transpurt. Wle have aryoiritLcd Nimio a membe10r ofJ--the
Grants Co zua5sion as a N~ o al Con,,: i ri o inc-uir into the
impact of freijht ILL-cS, oCAI~ a~ arinecn
THlE i-10! 1.-FORCE' Here then is a picture of tlre nat ion -rich in
resources, and through our policies, ( lett. in,-j ricber; rich in its
ability to develop those re,!( Jnrc('!: i. AnL Hirow( our lO . i c:
getting richer, a n-I t iou. i i r in iaJ'i: ri*. UjJ-t-JIIj h. Iomj
resou,. rces at home anhd abroa, v jAii uo OA Cik œ fcj t1 i'il
to th; tre tnm n io~ n 1, c c o1 . cie s,
oettintj rircher Yet we rcco i-ec [ H At IL-1ebasic AnIst) v'Ilian
resource, the to ( Il r 1jFj jov.. a m ii; j~ arj 1 o : i
the Austral~ ian % workof rce, aS Skillcd EIS ally in theC liO. Cld, a
hardiwo,, rki. nq as any in the world. TIhis workforce is overwhelingly
and increasingly coimposed o~ f employuees. 1'] o0re than ever before
and tLhe trend wX. continiuc the more skilled a pers. on is,
the more likcly it is thlat hie will be an eirployee.
For the first time the submnissions before e
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Coriu-ission hiavero been
positive and corist. ructive. As soon as we ' were. elected we
reoperied the eq. ual pay. case and our submiasion was suCCCS. Sful.
31 
32
In tha 1974 National " laye Case, we argued that the
miniimum wage sli,) ulj 11j e-: tenoed worlen anCm the automatic Viage
adjustmcnts to compensate for risina, prices snould be reintrodiuced.
There are complli-ng . in,,, iu::; t-L-rial, social2 and rworal arguments for
the eoual treatment xwo . er. n thc aorkforce. Further all women
whether in the w" orkfoicc or not, will knowa the need arnd the just"-ice
of automatic adjustim. ent..; to wages a-very t. 1hree mtonths. If accep~ ted
by trio Comdsslon these aUtonwti. C Z. Cj LIEt:,' ntS woxuld remove the
cause of miany inOU2; trial dlispu te: r' and would protect the fam., ily
budget against the effects of infJ.-tion.
The vast itajo::-ity of A'u-sL': liz-n oi-iJpoyees are membcrs
of unions employee a-ociationF*.. Th,:',. fey to industrial
efficiency is efficient cmlw) loyee organisattiecn. Our opponents
have obstructed our efforts to ; o. rieand denocrat.-Lse
Australian trade unions. There are too m~ lany. unions in Australia,
We have souiht to recluce the number--of uyilon: 7. There are too miany
needlo~ ss strik es in Austrcilaa w-, e have sought to reraova the
causes nueelss striik" cs. In tocefforts we have been opposed
by our opponent: s in the her PZrliamnnt and have met with no
co-oper. atioll fror~ thjei Cc ujde~. ate 41-n Ch tts
RestlJonsaibie leadeorship of both unions and iindustry
strongly supporLts a reductiLon in t-he, nuntber of unions and of
demarcaion disputes et.: nrivalj un1, ionS. Our lcg Kt" ation to
help union amalgamation has beeni tiwice reject'ed by the Senate.
In February J., 7,690 the Inri'utrial. Court pointed to the
u r gent need for tae Austr-. Iian.. ' ew South t~~, Queen~ sla. nd,
South Austr-aliari aid Weten Wstralian Parliarrents to remedy
the problewms creatcd by corflictiing atnd unrx:--ordinat~ ed federal
and Srtt c Ir partic-alar this situation has
caused. Jndustr-iai trf throac1-co~ metition fo union membership
within the saina 4indu : rv. Ul have. ;: cted u*,: q. cnt-lv on this riatter
whjlich the Industrial Cutsaicl war~ gent years ago'.
Ile have repeat,, dOly as-ke thle Stat-2s to ce-p aewith us in
co-ordiniatincjgisai Only SQcutli Austr'aJJid has cd-
We have iwet with 20o rosponse in pa.: tizular f rein Nlew South Wales,
the StLate whe.!: e: the pro) Je~ is : 1' cxst acute, most urgenit.
It is not my : ov. rhoweverl, to dwell or) matters
where we have b-eern fairustra&amp; Led, ciAtlir by thei-Seniate ox the States.
For the real story of the . a: t . seventcan inonthr, has-been one of
Coninunq Q ~ izie chievemenL. It has been a story of nc-O)
initiatives carried throughl, of ncov.? baginningso, of new co-operattion
at all levels: tc the gr~ tand enduring1; W ac1.' antagc of tha people
of raiion Outitnhhiss be o see that' n~ o Australian,
nobody % who ]. ivos in Austr-alia and cjs to caZ st his J-oL with
us, shoulci be eXc]. uded frmn the famiily of thc! nation. ive have
s ought to unite the nation and all wiio live in it. 
33
4ce have soucjht to 3( d Pp; Ortufli. tJes mforeC &amp;%; u21L.
to . O '~ UIt2o 10r&amp;; I ' ve SuC." ai i' ., Zae Ca 1-Iien rt C~ f
3.. e or all Our ouo,) 0C. -Je iiL.\' Q sougit. o ; pV. r n i. 2
for all citJ!. zoos th : L thrw fatiun nicgj) iL no ]. o,-Vcj 6Jqjin u
the i.: xistenfcc am. us 0o: tac g. rosse-: ine~ mualij, the
grouser diszadvantages, the ~ osrdiscriination.
In my p.. olicy specch in 1972 T said tha! L "~ All of us
as Australians are diminiihod whilIe the Abor iginec; a: dcrnio
tbjei r rightful. i1: lace in this nation" Doccmbiibr ). 972 h uh
d. a ill t} V: l.; J g~ u of Abor. iginal ut. 1an
ma Ku: by Sh. eful b'rutality, pi . tt. on egl:, ct. andCL contcernot.
We i. o not claK h: t ou,, r C LL h.) e e whoi. Y SCC. ' otul.*
33uL we m.~ n. w c. ourfc We vei atb ver*' le; t OlYC
a d o) to0 1.) Deupi. ~ ta d~' Aa i-a iuich h.! is ' 0een achi evA: and theroad
f~ or t: 1e, kut. Ire daily clc. arer. For the -first timo
S aborioiria x'oLces h" avoe 1-een hoard and iheedcd. From now on the. 1re
will t1nxvT! local comvmunity councils cnd at tho national level
througa the U i o:.( inal boisin close touch w-. ith
Aborig * inal orJn,, on zand int--rcs ts width authority to s,* peak for thcr-;'
and to work in tchei~ r Myn ~ eg~ cs-) vornmae{ t, o,, e of its f-I-St.
acts, decidocd thiat I rgnsin. t Northern Terri. ry sh ) uli
gratedrigh,_ s-to thcui r traditiun3i* lands&gt; wmrL oc tIc-~ A
esltablished. and ap-poinced Mr. Justice EI. A. kloodlward to advise us
on ho-v logi E-, I t ive uthnrity could best bct given to -that
) Lt. T. I[ oei ~ th; , a not Yeth~
cC: h'eI r2 Sns:. -7o t c) o vir 1I2I? Ii : ii c, nw ~ J; 3 3 to
oftiiciolehve fully acce:: tcd the ovtcrW-, ciI! 1.-p i i-structi4on
of t -Li. gi~ vonY in the reir~ Ou~ fl~ ito
&amp;. cc~. pt rnct.. ona. I i~ feopnr ~ Abc( A. iln.. 4 V. 51110h
zroAu'c.. 1i. n 3az -liamcnzt I , as oasscud, 1 the ncoudr
complecmonta . eil. to to giv6d 0Tiffct to pOPl
q:(-WttY. nI2V$ a ; bn rr ., ched in ~ in: e
a, States:_ cl e 1' id1 0 a
: oreached-c on~ -the trcansfe~ r of rc!-; poa-. sibii. ity for Ao~ iia
is fx-o~,' he Queens . Slid Governm&amp; . t to the Australiean-
Goverrnent., . wtheo pes cii : L deimnded 7 ya. na-o.
I e int4-. cend( to c: 1. iminate the remniantf3 Of discriminatory Queens. le. nd
l~~ a. cs1li jainst Aborigines and : TJlanders, a hope declared
y) r4. m MnCiister Gort-on.
Au~ t. c r looiwiii s neri-itled to free legal aidl
from the Aboriginal Legal Servicos % we establisheOd.. 
.34,
THE,~ L-AIJI tie have soucT lt, however, to riqlecm 0, jd
within the reach of all .' wu: traliaiis. arc concerned to
protect arnd enhan: e tlhie: ricjhts of z2. l AuStralians. r-Je
are determined to give realj moaning -, to the concept of
equality before thle Law.
The Australian 1. egal AieJ Sarvice has been
established to ensurce ready and equnal access to the Com:' tCs
to give every Ausc'Lralian ezrnual protection bofore thz! Law.
The service is already funct--onincj in all State capitals and
in Canberra and ] aii. Ofii. ces will Joe ened in rec~ i-inai
centres throughout Australi iL n the nex~-t 3
The refusal of Suppl~ y the Senate has delayed
* our legislation to estcah1ish an I'ustralian ombudsman and
Adninistx-ative AFpeals Tiribiiunal.
Pe wanrt to simrplify the law and it~ lecss
expensive, Wea'e-atbis~' d: I., aw ~ for Cct: Lmssion an~ d
* have set-up a Le, isLa1i-ve Drafting~ 2: ns! 7t-itU. L Co ran
in the d3rafting~ of' -, implcr an( larr-and therefo0re(
better law IW e . sI a I Ie cj' is 1at e I.-o 0, en-1 t 1io ': uhl ic
F, r v ant the ma) x3muzn sib-' fredmto ercisce the civil
and p-olica riq'hts e~ oe yOE~~ 1L~ S
VWe wjill proc,, edl with ou r iPre cidoti 6f In form~ at ion
A~ ct. The rcefCrCIOdUMnpooa be fore you are e i-jneci
to protect and enhance 1-ttuos r eassa ~. iocaIy. F, 1
* true eqiiality ofj r-epr esent: a. i-oA in ow: r'laetaypoess
As a further prote: cticrn arjainrst pervers'-wn of
these processes, we -noose for th-e riisclosure of
the sour1ce's of full"!-n asF; ino to
The Cokrcrnftion: wAJ rpin:. Iudc i r
flto-.) m! l-thorls 7cJeindcisimZ) Orn ad'-; e,-Se) yi cLJ3
. ti~ zenrs or lie w-. ill re-introdunce our Qci 21, tt on fe the
Sn oc'r ior Cour~ j-c-iustro ljia, a pr~ pco2Q., laulicheK. hI,
; ir Garfield 1. r in lIW-: i96, clev 2 oj by the present
Tea( der of the O~ o.~ r~ as 1\ trc-~ e~ a d introducerd
i,. ontli ago. 
The '\ ur-tral. i. an Coverninent is con\ vjnc-d tha t the
High Court of Australia mnust: hc-comcl th-e final court in all
ma tters pertaininig to Australiai andi to the legal. riqhts afld
obligations of its citizens. Inrocec-. : A4--h our
legslaion to abolish otePiv orc~
SIle have pa., sed three jAfllS concern: fyq onqera 2 arld
life insurance. Pe have 71rafted leg islat ion on novi intawaricc
companPi. s and on the upervision of ins-urancre bro! kers.
have twice introduce6 but not yet M.. 3se( 1 tho Finzancial
Corporations Bill. Ile would nave alre~ ady introduce.( 1
legislation for the controi of the securiie_ industry 1. ut
for the constant dlefeorment of a report front thel 1elect,
Comnmittee on Securities and ). xchanqe whiich the ~* ntesot
up over 4 years ago. Ne shall. introduce a. lat iona 1. Con. n) nie S
Act iwhich vyill ecj h . oriy-rr . cpePS' 0El 11uht by
Lierñ owerr;, Yt~ since thhe late 1950' s hut aelnow. ler190ed
to be un " tta -hkable through sep'Arate. acLs of the S'tate-s
Vle have dJrafted 1).. jEc; slaton to ta! l.' Ian e : thikand
J'und,. merntal to our whole hc OS1) andI fundamcnt. cal
to our programs is the idea of a . xouzAw. tralian national
sp. nt a heal thy prido ancl corifidI~ e c ow~: vs,
our country's promisc in our capacity to 1. i 1t the-stan-' ords
of our people andl help our less foj.-tur. 1: Le I. 0curi t
fuler andl hetter-life.
Sp ri. dec, arid toT o ehnel~ alrpg ec ult hteiv arOteco pla. e richol :) i~. 2i i~ cn-ur if( j forn fl1ic: i~ ounai; il
fulfilmenL e have qiYn higl\, pr4-im)-ty to tliaecc11qIe
of the: 7 arts, hiaa v rcC r t5 Lu1 14et r. l~ ( ounci. for
the Arts, andI prcvirle2 5Q1 ( foi[ lintr art s iri our firl; t.
Judcjet more ttntwi cce ou iven) hby our prdc.-ccs sors.
W CdLe. hut-. no L y(' et. r s cJi. I fo:-
)? otes*;__ are1the Chairman of the Aus-_ tralJian S. chools
ccirriission. It is not jus t the artists themsefl5IVOFS who will
benef it. Our purpose is I* o mal~ e the arts more accessible
to e-ve---y Auctralian, -to let ever,. y mian and ' woman share in
their challenge and enchantment and in the richer and fuller
life they can 1bring. 
36.
In the past 17 m,, onths we have encouraged a
greater participation of Australian creative and performing
tal. ent in radio, television and! cinema production.
Nlever before have there been s~ uch opportunities
for Austral~ ian artists. T7e are firmly cornu ritted to
miaininqa hos oportunities and increasing thewt still
f urther. Xn our niext three vears tin we il
prov~ ie at v-J. cost, aa daitionaEDo network
w: rraihavowrcev
a-n g3. C AYs~ eL e will introduoce V11 radio for high quad. ñ ty
U'UPbac at~~ than Oni the iv ento~ lvacepted heawnd
The pub!. ic iiw~ iuiry whAich we estabis41hc2 cajlcuiated that this
wouw. d cost an extra $ 2250 It would have been ; anoth--r
Fill. The pr.-evious coverninrii-Elso turncA a lideye to tChe
tecnial o~ sib2 ~: esOf new AMY ra~ dio stations. Additional
radio œ Jxequcncies w-. ill enable us to exp-And the comciuJa1
oerv' 3ccr;, cr-twbl; ish educational. and fora'i'n language
statio,-ts and uiall-e spf-cialpro' i o ~ 1rt mnoritJy cgroupf;.
W'e slijA. l introdiuCe colour tColevL5Lon in A'utrali~ a
on 1 llm. rch epr ev: tLOU' goC rmub~ ie
~ FsEiW~' ThY:~ ato inquje Ii the Cost Of colour
* tel. evision receivers. On-. of the first. steos I ' Cook after
Ibeco: minc Prilme ilirisr; Ll was to refer the10 ill-uP" ter to the
Tariff ) 2adfol inq~ uiry. E'ecauee~ of action talre. 1 by my
goeri~ ntto datc, colour television rc. ceives in Australia
will1 be availaWle to thce public-at a xmuchi ciicaocr price than
~ ould have been the had. Jh inquiry not brZ! en held.
We hal; e etl. hdthe Filmn and T ol r i S o 1
School anJ we ILicrodhice Tcq-.( JSiL. Y u~ rteA~ rl
ara nlv s the Austi~ xalian I; oniC. L'rthe Au,,-traliari
Na t: 01n1 a-~ CU andJ Col ct) i. onr3 th AutT 1' ii an i111.
CO'MS iCon, -L o 11. i: s ru : onht Aieic inCT
a ndTT-t-1l--Fc-ou) 1-nty.
In short, as far a qovernmnts can act in
terms of money and iiiachiner, , e v re creal~ inq the conditions
for a renascence of Australian creativity. 
-37.
-f V3T:' RNA'T TniJ7t%, ITT O MS
: lore than ever before Austral. ians ar1c en-tit * lCe
to feel Lorit'l in theiAr nation. T~ oe have never beec( n liel-0 in
higcher respect abroad. ore than ever beforc Austk-ralians
arc, eititCledl to feel confid6enit. I have said much ahout: our
resources. In the final analysis our r: icbest resource, an
irreplaceablie one, is our naitionial rei,-u t* at. ion). Tha t
reputation has never been higher. Ir have saiA muc-h about
providing security for all. our citizens. In its wiclest
sense this country has ne-ver 1-) en more secure. A u s tr a'( iL now
has bas.-ica).]. y a bi. partisax forei. gn Policy, not b~ ecause of
any change o-f heart or miric1 on the partk-of our opponerits, b ut
bracause we; as a' governmont recoyrnisc~ d and acted ur) ofl the"
rea.-lities of worl affairs and above all t he realities of our
regi~ on. Our op ' poneni11-s hav\, e just cuh: up witk-h reality.
* The feairc, the shih-b) oleths on which they trziae for a
generat:;. on have. been sw-erpt aw! ay. Try as they ight wish as
they magih. our o-f;-onents cannot return to the Dast'.
It is beccause iw. e rcgic1the realities of
* our tines t'hat orforeign policy has )-een so succes! sfl
Wand our defence policy so relevant. e approa--ch the
managementl-of def-ence matter-cs on the basis thi. tL the
interna:: tional situt~ tion and the-atfairs of the region Ere in
the process of rapidt clh ; nqe. Tie saw that defe', nce policy and
foreiLgn policy hdto b~ e b-rought into line wi'jth these changjes,
into lina with tliese reatlities. Ile saw-v how. fax-both deifcrnce
and foreign po: licy had beco-me basedl on p-ast concept~ s iand~ eeep
rtisconcc -tions of thec proesent.
In 1.972 -1 undertook to loadt( this country to her
rightful proud ancd securce pl. ace in th-e w-. orld. IA--can be
w proud of our repu kation can ccoi. n* :. dciint of our sccur'it.
V-e have set a nevy course fo. x-Australia v'ay from
interventionism, towards tr--* uc interlnationali sin. This i s the
most genu;. neiy interinational govern-ment lustra J. ia has ever
O had. VTh have placedl our relations-hips with the United
S tates and the United Ringdom on tho basis of mature
partne rr; h) ip1. ' ec have reneg9ot-iated the aqr-ceint for -the
L-te States flaval Communication St~ ation ilto rth v-est Cape.
The agreement sjigned by our opponent. s: vas a denial of
Austral. ia's rights. The new agreevient asserts and establishesF
them. ha;: ve-wid'. ened our ho-rizons, sought anti, achieved
growing co-operation with t~ te count: ries of the Cornmnwe,( alth
and with the nations round. the In ian and south Pacifi. c
Oceans. 
17e have: Irouciht co-operation and frin:. 1ship with
Japan, our greatest trading partner, to a new~ l-vel.
Followinq an agreem.--ent in principle between Prime ' Iinister
Toy last Octobe.-r, We'i c1e into a treal-y of ricileWShi
theTra of Fjs~ er
Ue have sought to 1. realh Oown ideological constraints
which had for so long; oLbstructeO! meaningful relationships with
countries such as China, Past Germiany aylo Uar1 Viet!~~ L
Wc have sought to remove any taint of racism from
our national and ite: rnatioja. nolicies.
Pe havo co--opera'tel c. Lo. sely with the Government and
H~ ouse of Assemibly of Papua P ew Gluinea as our neighbour moves
* towards independlence bDy Dccemher this year.
TlJe hwave forgued and intiriate links with the
countries of'. A. S. V". A. rlI. TnrI. 0neSIa-, the Philippines, ~ a~ a
Thai lan!. e-n6 1i-lrrh ave acce-pt-ed their inv ita tio. n
to co-operatec with A. S i Qfl devt-lorv ' ot ts.
With the agreceme: nt of all1 it-s nieibers, we have
secured the remodellinrg o; . E A PC
Ue haove-, taken f irm moarures for disarmlaltent and
against the develo; rf cnt and pr: ol zf-ra ticr of nuc lear waos
Pe have ratif-ied the nuclear non-prolifera. tion treaLy and
the Sea.-led Arms Cont--: ol Treaty. Ile have protosted ar1a jis t
C h i ne se t es ts IWe niali used every availab?. o, leqal. an.-.
* politica). channel to persuade F-rance to desist from its
atmospheric polluinlon ixn our h em) ni S I crr
VWe have actively suipported the obrjectives of the
zoofpne ae ad nutrality in South Fna; t Asia and the
Indian Ocean z~ ne of peaco. Pe haye madle pol-.' rrful
W reprOsentat4io3ns in T,*' ashi~ nq1: c-n an. ocwto p! r suacle the-m
to exorcis8' restrai~ nt annI not to ma]:. ehe Indian Ocecmi yet
another scene for great, pownr rivalry.
Wehave introlue3 1, ul: vetpa~. lciQtn
to eaals nAsi] inPvio'n: L; It:~ c] nY' in
order to . lii-v h! a ruaii-. our a ir) ) Yoq rain, arvO -move.
tctdh0{~-I Zton a 1 ta3-cq ei, wih C, we~ hav, aci; eptc d, o( 7 
39.
Dr, T-PNCE W'. e have encouraged and supotd the-, ' Jetente
betwoen the great po',, Yers-. 1,, e have tal-en aclvantag of the more
hopeful ou-L. ook in our region to _ reorjanisc: Australia's
defence forces. To giv,, e a tarigible and pcactical basis to
our defence relations wi1.. th ot-hcr countri. es we have ebredon
an expanded progia of exercises w, it h our neighbours and.
traitional allies. In June, the l? rqest peacc-timei exerCise
ever held in Australi-a will be helrd in Queenslanrd involving
over 8,000 servicemeri fromn Australia, P1ew Zealanrl, the U~ nited
States and Gj: eat Britain.
The Deputy Prime ! JnistCer, iny . closest colleague
downn the yca:,_ s, T1r Lance Parn;; rd, has provocd the most
const.-ructivc. and effective, ministerial, hea( 2 of the, dlefence
forces in Aut: la'ahistory. T-je has ayialgaal-. cd the IDcfa~ ncce
JDeparytvtent and the 3 Service tert ( is reo;~ n~ din the
report, of the-iqorsho-ad Coitmit-Cee wshi. ch our predE. cc,. ssors
sup-pressr-2 -oz 15 yeaors. HeI has-underta):,' n to es1to;*&amp; jish the.
co:,-bined Au.-tralian Defence Frce Academ~;-y. The scvices are
being~ equipped to pleay a gjreater role in case of c1neracricies
and natural disasters. He has presenter'. to the Parliame-nnt a chiarter
for the Citizen Military Force s, -a newv cdisciplinary code o
the forces a nenw p2: ocurcenert p~~~ mfor taW,' s : cna ie
aOrcraft and destrors. ( Our p) Xo5cft. ta-nkzs %,, ere orclerci y h
last Lab-or Governmient a quartern of a century ago.)
fie has ap.-po~ nted. a military ombudsman.
F~ e has instiituted. the-regul ar ; rceviev, of: sn. vitce Pay and
allowances and a comprell-ronsive andl coiworoeni, ibl a Defence
Forces Retirement ar(! Docath 11( new~ itc schcme. Pie has co-o-: 1: inated
the passaae of 17 measures 31-alin( T With 3-0_ repatriOat: io31, taxa-Ftion,
eduication and acco-mmodati'on bene fits for sorviceiztfn and the
draftIing of 9 more such measures.
In short, we have.-ila) ycd steidily and firmly
towards our aimi that Auta:.* salhave theC cfence-. forces
she needs -finely e-quipperl, higjhly professi. onal, high mobile
and highly respected. 
rV
Here then i. s a record of achieve-ment, of purpose,
yet it-is a record of a governrnent w.. hich has heen in office
a mere 17 months. It is a record -6f a government which came
into oiflfice after 23 unhrol! en Years of Dower hecld by our
~ o~ o~ ns~ 23 years or decay and neglect. It i~ s a record of
a govcrrni.. ent whicl-had hva, -o overcoiie unparaliclled
o b st *-, ti: ion i n . a S c n a 4-Q i n i) ic h I JLt wa s in a i,, noc) r it Y. ThiS
was our legacy inl 1972 23 yearis of* our opoets'iStZ1, e~ s
and a hostiAle Sen,-ate. rl-e havre lived with the part and wer have
ovc _ rcc-. nea thec-past, the record shiow-s it.
11ow our opponernt,,: propose._ a return to the past,
* the attitucles aneA policies of . the past whiich you so firmly
rejecteO only 17 imonths agjo. tlhere hoe no ~ mistake abrout
the truLe na-'. ture o: E thes tii-. n-s and olicies. In the, oast
17 months our oppo. nents ha-ve siiown no repentancc,, they h'ave.
done ) o On ev r mAjor issue ilow a) s always, they
* come cOown on the side of prvl~. Th-e who7Lle thrust their
policies . ceiflis theC retenL-ion o-c priviloge
priv-41l':. io. ThiLs has been tl-e t x runningJ through the~ ir
pattern o-C'f obStruction and o-Pporsition. They resistO. to the
ele-enth hour our proposals ~ oqivo 1mosti mone'.,, to the -oSt
nee-dy sc] ools. The \ 7 havo ohbst--_ ct-ed "-at every tu" rn our la r
to give health covor tCo th-: milliii unlprotectec! Australians..
OQl : every cccas:! on tILhey have s~ prung to the dlefence of we'illthy
interest-. who fear-that ouir ofo~ sto retain the greater
haeof Iuiztralia; n control ov'er our resources may inconvenience
tbc-m1. They hay--opposedt our every effort to have qreate-r
c'ualil-in parli~. lcentary re~~ eiaini uta.
The last elect~ ion was oezscritiaJ. ly about the
pro-motk-ion of op,? tuin itict-: of ;: urr c, i -* XorJt-un itie 3 ane-d morla
eC'ual opportunities, all~ i Austra1.1* 0r1S. n the past .17
onths that effort has been carrica on with zcst, deter-ii,, iation
and Ispucciceecs s sccs of course the tiimeF hasbe
short, the back~ log of 23 years so groat The question now
is % whether that work1-shall go on.-.--The quostion iS whether the
great opporitunItie. s this nation* offero -shall ba more and m.. ore
equally sha-red, whether prfvilege halbe deeper and ezeeper
entrenched. This lawhat you have to1c lecide.
W~ hen they makeo thieir jue~ geii,: ent I to the basic
intelligence and idealism of t! 7 Australian people. I rely on
it, and I -rely upon it with confidenno-a. in all my fafforts to
reform and revital. ise Australia, in my efforts to reform
and revitaliSe the Australian Lalo. P. artv, 1 have relied upon
that: inteolligencia and t,-ha't Lresñ Andi voru havje never Let
me down. T look to the imen cJ. 7, ustrali-' who bel,-ieve in a fair
go not. just a fair go for an elected' g overnmnent, hut a fair
go for all those of their fel. low citizens to whi . Cur policies
have brought a new hope, a ne' chan ce for a Odecent life. I
look to the women of Australia, who .'-ell ifnow what our program, 
has-alre-ady meant for the future, welfare of our children, of
our aged, our sick, oxr f~ look,.-to the idealism
of that vast new constitucency of irura anl women over the acjTe
of 18 now voting for thc first tiri~ e. It ip, al-ove all their
f; uture at stake. 1' or the outco.-me o this clectio must go
t ar to de!: ocrmine the sort of Austcal ia they will be living in
for the rest of their lives.
Bere is the recordl. !! ere is the:. promise of the
fulfilment of the pi-ogram!; w have begun with such vigor and
determiation with dcaicaticn. que, tion is whetCher
the action of our opponents last month was only a temporary
interruption to thosre progrc~ ms or the-i-r dlestri. ction. It is
nonsenfse to believe that oppunlants w'oul. d accept and apply
our prcjms and policies w, h ich they resisf. ed and. deriJded for
* 23 yas rel. ory--Austrahians?-it is a tima for decision,
and I put thc. e quetionsj to ' iou.
Are you for e. fcU. i go, not just a fair go 
an elected Govornwm: nt, but a fargo for our program to w-ork?
Are you for giving us a chaince to make them work?
Are youi for Pixst--aliris haiga fair opplortunilty
to have a fai-r share in conti. L. and1 ownership of theirJ. 3 own
resources? Are you In favour of giving every Austral1-ian chlildi,
whatever his parents i~ iani ocj ~ cd a ifair start, an equal
start in life? Av~ e yo. u : E-01. h du. wa have given to our
children, to the O-pcndLrt, tho cli. ,; z! dvantaqge-d in our community?
S Aro y'ou foi: thic :, iore docent the more humane,
the more toie: caP:, thc :~ int : ooe'coi ety wic have been
trying to build1 in thie last J. 7 im. onths?
A ro: t 1, e A u str, 1i a n p-cofIe-to allowed to rear)
the full harvest, 11 of ouor pro'jrams?
I don't1 be). imive the. Autralian people areL(-going
to turn h-ac. 1 don't belie4. ve they'r going to turn their backs
on the promis-. of the future.
I d. on' t bohl ove thg ecoing to throw wimy the
new opjortuwA.' S -11C newJ hiopes, -! ic new iitiozial fpirit ar-A
national self-r. se. 
r 42.
I ( Ion't -elie7e they wjia :. 1 a &gt;-ar Of the
tactics, the bl;: tart opportmn. i sm of ouw opponents.
I don't believe for a :-icren t th. Cy arr-AhCit
do wlh! at they , ave refused to do in all our histcry
a strncg, united cqover: frent, i tqovnrnmnent wilJ. l a clear program,
a proven record, a great record, and hand this country over to
a Odiscreitied, di. sunited, ( iiscarded coalition of fru-ltration
and futility, without policies, without unity, without
leader,. jhip. And t1at is the real choice on the 18 tva,,,.
Therofore I looj: lith ronfidence to a great vrote
of affirmation on the R 1ay a migyhty votc of ye yes I-o
our xeferenCitui prop -sals yes to tu return of o-r gjovernment
t" e fut!. Iv,, a bright confidant, prCoud, secure future 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, IMR E, G. WHITLAM
AT THE SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE
MONDAY 13 MAY 1974
ON 2 DECEMBER 1972 THERE WAS A NEW SPIRIT OF
HOPE KINDLED IN THIS'COONTRY. THAT HOPE, FOR A BETTER
AUSTRALIA, A MORE EQUAL AUSTRALIA, A MORE INDEPENDENT
AUSTRALIA, A MORE TOLERANT AUSTRALIA, A MORE COMPASSIONATE
AUSTRALIA, BURNS BRIGHTER THAW EVER. AND IT WILL BURN
BRIGHTER STILL,' AFTER 18 MAY.
EVERYTHING I KNOW ABOUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
EVERY RESPONSE OF THE PAST TWO WEEKS AN ENTHUSIASM
AND EXHILERATION, A DETERMINATION BEYOND ALL MY EXPERIENCE
IN PUBLIC LIFE CONFIRMS MY BELIEF THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE ARE NOT GOING TO TURN BACK, THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO TURN THEIR. BACKS ON THE MILLIONS OF THEIR FELLOW
CITIZENS TO WHOM OUR GOVERNMENT HAS BROUGHT A NEW DEAL,
A NEW SENSE OF PURPOSE AND A NEW SENSE OF PRIDE AND
PARTICIPATION IN THEIR COUNTRY, 
AFTER NEXT SATURDAY, WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A NEW
PARLIAMENT, A CONTEMPORARY PARLIAMENT, A PARLIAMENT FOR
OUR TIMES, WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A CONSTITUTION THAT
REFLECTS THE NEEDS OF OUR TIMES IN CRUCIAL MATTERS OF
EQUAL DEMOCRATIC REPRESENTATION OF WORKABLE PARLIAMENTS
OF FULL LOCAL GOVERNMENT PARTNERSHIP IN OUR NATIONAL AFFAIRS,
WE ARE GOING TO HAVE AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CONTINUING
TO CARRY OUT ITS MANDATE, BUT THIS TIME, A GOVERNMENT
WITH THE AUTHORITY IT NEEDS TO GO AHEAD, AGAINST THE
OBSTRUCTION OF THE MEN OF YESTERDAY,
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN AN ELECTION IN LIVING MEMORY
WHERE THE ISSUE AT STAKE WAS SO CLEAR AND SO C-LEAR-CUTI
IT IS NOTHING LESS THAN WHETHER PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY
SHALL PREVAIL, WHETHER ELECTED GOVERNMENTS SHALL. HAVE
THE RIGHT TO CARRY ON THEIR FULL ELECTED TERM AND TO
CARRY OUT THE FULL PROGRAM FOR WHICH THEY WERE ELECTED, 
-3-
THE HOPES RELEASED BY OUR VICTORY IN 1972
WERE NOT CONFINED TO AUSTRALIA. AROUND THE WORLD,
PARTICULARLY IN OUR REGION, PEOPLE WERE MADE TO BELIEVE
THAT PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY COU_ L WORK, THAT THERE
COULD BE ORDERLY CHANGE, PEACEFUL CHANGE TO BELIEVE
THAT A GOVERNMENT ENTRENCHED FOR 23 YEARS OF ALMOST
UNCHALLENGED POWER COULD BE REMOVED BY THE WILL OF THE
PEOPLE, EXPRESSED FREELY, PEACEFULLY AND EMPHATICALLYV
NOW THEY SEE ALL THAT PUT IN JEOPARDY, AFTER ONLY
17 MONTHS. THE ELECTION OF OUR GOVERNMENT NOT ONLY
CREATED A NEW INTEREST IN AUSTRALIA, AROUND OUR REGION,
AROUND THE WORLD: IT REPRESENTED A NEW HOPE FOR
DEMOCRACY EVERYWHERE, FOR THE PRINCIPLE OF PEACEFUL CHANGE
THROUGH PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS. 
-4-
WHAT OUR OPPONENTS SAY TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
AND WHAT THEY WANT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO SAY TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD IS THAT IT WAS ALL A MISTAKE.
THEY SAY: TURN BACK THEY SAY: COME BACK
COME BACK TO THE SAME OLD DESPAIR, THE SAME OLD DIVISIONS,
THE SAME OLD PREJUDICES, THE SAME OLD MANIPULATED FEARS,
THE SAME OLD DRIFT, THE SAME OLD STOP-GO, THE SAME
OLD SPECIAL PLEADING, THE SAME OLD DOMINATION BY SPECIAL
INTERESTS, THE SAME OLD CREW THAT YOU REJECTED ONLY
17 MONTHS AGO AND REPLACED IN A PEACEFUL, ORDERLY,
DEMOCRATIC WAY ONLY 17 MONTHS AGO. 
WHAT IS IT THEY ASK YOU TO REJECT? WHAT IS IT
THAT HAS STIRRED UP SO MUCH VOCAL AND VISIBILE HOSTILITY
AMONG POWERFUL INTERESTS AGAINST MY GOVERNMENT?
IT IS BECAUSE WE HAVE PLACED THE PEOPLE BEFORE SPECIAL
PRIVILEGE. IN ORDER TO FIGHT INFLATION, TO PROVIDE
MONEY FOR SCHOOLS, FOR HOSPITALS, FOR THE AGED, THE
HANDICAPPED, FOR OUR. CITIES, WE HAVE WITHDRAWN HAD. TO
WITHDRAW SOME SPECIAL PRIVILEGES CONFERRED BY OUR
OPPONENTS AN AMOUNT IN ALL OF NEARLY $ 500 MILLION
OF YOUR MONEY. OUR OPPONENTS ARE COMMITTED TO RESTORING
THESE PRIVILEGES. -THEY PROPOSE TO DO IT WITH YOUR MONEY,
AND WITH THE MONEY THAT WE HAVE DIVERTED TO AREAS OF
GREATEST NEED, TO SCHOOLS, TO HEALTH, TO WELFARE,
TO CITIES, TO THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE, TO THE PLACES
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE AND HAVE TO LIVE, AND TO
THE NEEDS OF MOST AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.
FOR LET IT BE UNDERSTOOD:. EVERY CONCESSION AND SUBSIDY
TO A SPECIAL MINORITY INTEREST IS A TAX UPON THE MAJORITY,
A TAX UPON YOU AND YOUR FELLOW CITIZENS OUTSIDE.
SO BE CLEAR ABOUT OUR OPPONENTS' INTENTIONS.
THEY TALK ABOUT A PACKAGE TO FIGHT INFLATION. NOW WE KNOW
WHAT'S IN THE PACKAGE. 
FIRST, RESTORE ALMOST $ 500 MILLION WORTH OF
SPECIAL INTEREST PAYMENTS, BOUNTIES AND CONCESSIONS AND
. SUBSIDIES, How WOULD THIS BE DONE? WITH YOUR TAXES.
SECONDLY, FREEZE WAGES. HOW WOULD THIS BE DONE?
BY SUSPENDING THE ARBITRATION COMMISSION, UNDERMINING
ITS AUTHORITY, SETTING ASIDE FEDERAL AWARDS AND LETTING
STATE POLITICIANS SET YOUR WAGES AND SALARIES. FOR
THAT IS WHAT MR SNEDDEN'S PROPOSAL FOR A WAGE FREEZE MEANS.
WOULD YOU LET SIR ROBERT'ASKIN FIX YOUR INCOMES?
THIRDLY, MR SNEDDEN HAS A MARVELLOUS. PROPOSAL:-
TO BRING DOWN THE PRICE OF MEAT BY WITH-HOLDING LOCAL
SUPPLIES AND THEN IMPORTING MEAT. AT THE RISK OF
BEING CORRECTED BY PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, WE HAVEN'T
IMPORTED MEAT SINCE BENNELONG WAS A BOY, OR AT LEAST
SINCE GOVERNOR PHILLIP PLANTED THE UNION JACK DOWN THERE
ACROSS THE QUAY. 
FOURTHLY, OUR OPPONENTS SAY, DOUBLE THE PRICE
OF PETROL. FOR MAKE NO MISTAKE, WHAT ANTHONY SAYS,
CLEOPATRA MUST DO.
THAT IS THE-PACKAGE. SOME PLAN AGAINST INFLATION:
SOME PACKAGE: AND FOR THE REST OF THEIR POLICIES WE ' LL READ
ABOUT THEM IN THE HERALD OVER THE 3 DAYS 3 DAYS
BEFORE THE ELECTION THEY'LL TELL US WHAT THEY PROPOSE
FOR THE NEXT 3 YEARS.
.7-
WE ARE FIGHTING INFLATION. WE ARE BEATING
INFLATION, WE SHARE THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION WITH
EVERY COMPARABLE COUNTRY; AND WE ARE DOING BETTER THAN
ANY COMPARABLE COUNTRY, ALONE AMONG COMPARABLE COUNTRIES,
OUR INFLATION RATE FELLLAST QUARTER. IT WILL CONTINUE
TO FALL. BUT ALMOST ALONE AMONGST THOSE COMPARABLE
COUNTRIES, WE. ARE-NOT FIGHTING INFLATION BY PUTTING
MEN AND WOMEN OUT OF WORK. WE HAVE-RESTORED THE
FULL EMPLOYMENT. DESTROYED BY MR SNEDDEN WHEN HE WAS
TREASURER. WE WILL MAINTAIN FULL EMPLOYMENT.
ALONE AMONGST THESE COMPARABLE COUNTRIES WE ARE CONTINUING
TO FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION WHILE CONTINUING TO PROVIDE
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUR CHILDREN, THE DISADVANTAGED,
FOR HOME SEEKERS, FOR HOME BUYERS, FOR THE CITIES.
i 
THE FIGHT AGAINST ' INFLATION WILL CONTINUE.
IT WILL BE WON. BUT WE DO NOT CHOOSE TO FIGHT IT
AT OUR CHILDREN S EXPENSE, OR AT THE EXPENSE OF THE
DISADVANTAGED OF THIS NATION. IT WON'T . BE WON BY
LETTING OUR PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN OUR CITIES BECOME
EVEN MORE RAMSHACKLE, MORE AND MORE INEFFICIENT,
MORE COSTLY, IT WILL BE WON ON THE BASIS OF MORE EQUAL
SHARING OF OUR OPPORTUNITIES, OF OUR WEALTH, AND
IF EVER NECESSARY, MORE EQUAL'SPREADING OF SACRIFICES.
I CANNOT PROMISE THE GRAZIERS EARNING. OVER
A HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS, WHO HAVE LOST $ 4 MILLION
IN SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTIES, THAT THEY MIGHT NOT HAVE
TO FOREGO A NEW YACHT FOR A YEAR. BUT I WILL PROMISE YOU
THAT NO AUSTRALIAN CHILD WILL HAVE TO FOREGO A YEAR'S
EXPANDED EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES AND IN EFFECT,
AS IT WOULD BE-UNDER OUR OPPONENTS, LOSE THOSE NEW
OPPORTUNITIES FOR A LIFETIME. 
WHAT HAS OUR GOVERNMENT BEEN ABOUT?
THIS VERY MEETING, THE GREAT PLACE IN WHICH IT IS HELD,
THE AUSPICES UNDER WHICH IT IS HELD, THE COMING TOGETHER
OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS CITY WHO WORK IN THIS CITY,
WHO GIVE THIS CITY ITS LIFE, SYMBOLISE WHAT THIS
GOVERNMENT IS ALL ABOUT.
WE ARE FOR THE PEOPLE, AGAINST SPECIAL INTERESTS.
WE ARE FOR EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY, AGAINST PRIVILEGE.
WE ARE FOR A MODERN, PROGRESSIVE, HUMANE AUSTRALIA.
WE ARE FOR AN AUSTRALIA IN WHICHEVERY CITIZEN
EVERYONE BORN HERE) EVERYONE WHO SETTLES AMONGST US, HAS
A FAIR AND EQUAL CHANCE TO ENJOY THE OPPORTUNITIES
OUR GREAT WEALTH OFFERS, WHERE EVERY MAN AND WOMAN
CAN PARTICIPATE AS A FULL MEMBER OF SOCIETY, FULLY
INVOLVED IN THE WORK OF MOVING THIS COUNTRY AHEAD.
AND THAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PRESENCE OF
SO MANY DISTINGUISHED AUTHORS AND ARTISTS AND ACADEMICS
HERE TODAY. 
THIS COUNTRY HAS SEEN IN THE LAST 17 MONTHS
AN UNPARALLELLED BURST IN CREATIVE ACTIVITY.
SURE, WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE FOR THE ARTS A GREAT AMOUNT
OF MONEY, FOR INSTANCE, TODAY I WILL BE ANNOUNCING
THE FULFILMENT, AFTER MANY MONTHS OF INQUIRY, OF A
PROMISE I MADE IN 1972 FOR A PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT,
BY WHICH AUSTRALIA'S AUTHORS CAN RECEIVE PAYMENT FOR
THEIR BOOKS IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
BUT AS FAR AS THE ARTS ARE CONCERNED,. IT'S NOT
JUST A MATTER OF MONEY; IT IS A MATTER OF INVOLVEMENTL
INVOLVEMENT IN THE MAINSTREAM OF THE LIFE OF THE REAL
AND LIVING COMMUNITY. FOR IT IS OUR ARTS, OUR
GREAT BUILDINGS, LIKE THIS, WHICH EXPRESS TO GENERATIONS
YET UNBORN WHAT WE WERE LIKE IN OUR TIME, WHAT WE
ACHIEVED, WHAT WE DARED TO TRY TO ACHIEVE, IN OUR TIME.
i. 
IN 17 MONTHS WE HAVE ACHIEVED MUCH AND WE HAVE
DARED TO ACHIEVE MUCH TOGETHER. BUT THERE IS SO MUCH
MORE TO BE DONE TOGETHER. IT HASN'T BEEN ALL
PLAIN-SAILING, AND I'M NOT SAYING THERE AREN'T THINGS
WE WOULDN'T HAVE DONE DIFFERENTLY, GIVEN MORE TIME,
GIVEN THE EXPERIENCE WE NOW HAVE. WE ARE TRYING
TO ACHIEVE AN AUSTRALIA WHERE THE ABLE AND THE ABLE-BODIED,
THE TALENTED, THE SKILLED, CAN ENJOY THE FULLEST FRUITS
OF THEIR GIFTS, AND OPPORTUNITIES; BUT, AT THE SAME
TIME AND ABOVE ALL, AN AUSTRALIA WHERE NO GROUP OF
AUSTRALIANS MUST TAKE SECOND AFLACE OR GO TO'THE WALL
JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE WOMEN, JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE NEWCOMERS,
OR BECAUSE THEY ARE YOUNG, OR BECAUSE THEY HAVE TO. LIVE
IN NEW AND DISTANT SUBURBS, OR BECAUSE THEIR PARENTS ARE
POOR, OR BECAUSE THEY ARE HANDICAPPED, OR BECAUSE THEY
ARE OLD, OR BECAUSE THEY ARE ABORIGINES, OR BECAUSE
THEY HAVE SUFFERED INJURY OR SICKNESS.
WE ARE TRYING TO BUILD AN AUSTRALIA WHERE ALL CAN
FEEL INVOLVED, AN AUSTRALIA IN WHICH ALL FEEL A SENSE OF
DIRECTION, OF PURPOSE, AN AUSTRALIA WHICH BELONGS, NOT. TO
SPECIAL INTERESTS, NOT TO THE PRIVILEGED MEN BORN TO RULE,
RQI TO OVERSEAS. CORPORATIONS, BUT AN AUSTRALIA WHICH
BELONGS TO AUL AUSTRALIANS,
AND IT CAN BE DONE, WE ARE GOING TO DO IT. 
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH OUR PROGRAM.
WE ARE GOING TO CARRY THAT PROGRAM THROUGH.
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM.
WE ARE GOING TO DO IT. WILL YOU JOIN US IN DOING IT?
IT CAN BE DONE THROUGH THE PROGRAMS WE HAVE STARTED,
THROUGH THE PROGRAMS THAT ARE NOW BEARING THEIR FRUIT
FOR THE BENEFIT OF ALL AUSTRALIANS.
WILL YOU LET US GET ON WITH THAT JOB?
IN THIS GREAT CITY; THE LIVING SYMBOL OF SO
MUCH THAT WE AUSTRALIANS HAVE ACHIEVED TOGETHER IN
THE PAST: IN THIS BUILDING, SO MUCH A LIVING . SYMBOL OF
OUR PRESENT VIGOR, PROSPERITY, PRIDE AND STRENGTH)
AT THIS MEETING, SO MUCH THE SYMBOL OF THE NEW HOPES
BORN AND THE TALENTS AND ENERGIES UNLEASHED BY OUR
EMPHATIC BUT NONETHELESS INCOMPLETE VICTORY 17 MONTHS AGO:
I ASK YOUR SUPPORT FOR THE FUTURE, FOR YOUR FUTURE,
YOUR CHILDREN'S FUTURE, FOR THE FUTURE OF AUSTRALIANS
YET UNBORN. 
AUSTRALIANS CAN TURN BACK, TURN THE CLOCK BACK,
GO BACK TO ALL THAT OLD HOPELESS NESS, FLATNESS AND
STALE FUTILITY, OR THEY CAN GO ON AND GO AHEAD
WITH OUR PROGRAM OUR CLEAR AND POSITIVE PROGRAM
FOR A STRONG, UNITED, MORE EQUAL AUSTRALIA.
LET SATURDAY BE THE DAY WHEN AUSTRALIA SAID
OVERWHELMINGLY YES TO THE FUTURE. 
404 .10,101 A1
( A jai.) V
6TK .0 An[ nOa os c. flai'* Kom
IA o ia Y A no. t i 1001a13' v
" r pins' I. n . m 



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON : PRIME MINISTER'S OPENING ADDRESS
MAY 1974
Mr. President, your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Please forgive me if I'm not too formal. I have no text to
declaim to you. I will make some preliminary observations
and then whether I like it or not I'll have to answer your
questions. I gather that on previous speeches in this particular round
there have been a great number of references to economic
affairs. I shall quote from a part of your newspapers
tomorrow morning which you won't be writing yourselves.
It's a letter from economists a majority of the professors
and staff in economic faculties right round Australia. It
states, since the present government won office, Australia
has witnessed several significant changes in economic policy.
The government has, for instance, revalued the currency, cut
tariffs across the hoard, increased interest rates and
substantially reduced the alarming growth in the money supply.
Inflation has, of course, been the major concern of economic
management for the government. The rapid increase in prices
has been an international phenomenon as well as a national
one and we doubt that any Australian government could have
managed to isolate our economy from these international
price movements. We believe that the general thrust of the
government's policy responses has been in the best interests
of the nation as a whole. More importantly, we seriously
doubt that the previous government would have had the wisdom
or the courage to undertake it. It had certainly given no
indication of moving in that direction while it was in power,
even though the need for such policies had become obvious.
There can be no doubt that inflation would have been even
more severe had the government not taken the steps outlined
above. .2/ 
We urge the public to carefully weigh these matters before
making their decision on the 18th May. The letter which is
being delivered to all the metropolitan morning papers today
is signed by 130 professors and staff members, the first
signature being Professor Trevor Swan, the Doyen of
Economics at the Australian National University in this
c ity where we are meeting and the it goes right through
and the last signaturies are from Drs. Ironmonger and Sheehan
of the Institute of Applied Economic Research, Melbourne, the
Editor and the Assistant Editor of the Australian Economic
Review. I noticed that in his address to you yesterday, Mr. Snedden
had doubted that on the 2nd of December the people of
Australia had voted for a change and~ doubted that they knew
what they were doing when they voted the way they did. I
would merely point out that the program which I put on behalf
of the Australian Labor Party in the elections before the 2nd
December 1972 had been developed openly over many years. It
hadn't emerged from a war council the previous weekend. It
hadn't been evolved behind closed doors three weeks befQre.
It in fact had been in print in party documents for months
and years before. It had been debated in public. It had been
put up in the form of motions and amendments in both Houses
of the national Parliament. It was well known, and there
could have been no greater, longer opportunity for the
Australian people to know what any political party would do
if it received their support than was the case before we were
elec -ted by the people with a comfortable majority in the
House of Representatives on the 2nd December 1972. Now how
have we tried to carry out our programs, the ones which we
enunciated then? We have put through the Parliament a record
number of bills. There has never been so active a Parliament
as that which was dissolved three weeks ago. None of the
legislation we introduced diverged from programs which we had
published and debated before the people elected us to a majority
in the House of Representatives. I'm told that in another
speech last night on David Frost, Mr. Snedden said that he .3/ 
would now accept all the legislation that went through
except those bills which had been rejected in the Senate.
Perhaps then, I can refer to some of those bills which
had been rejected in the Senate so that one can see the
difference in approach between the Government and the
conservative coalition opposing it.
One of the bills rejected by the Senate was the Trade
Practices Bill. It followed up on suggestions which had
been made by Liberal attorneys-general including Mr. Snedden
himself. In particular, it wanted to ensure that companies
could not by collusion fix prices between them. It also
had an extensive code for customer protection. We have said
we would introduce such legislation. We introduced it 9
months ago. It came up for debate oh three occasions in
the subsequent months in the Senate where it had been
introduced first. On each of those three occasions, the
Senate voted not even to debate the bill. Then there was
the Australian Industry Development Corporation Bill. It
was an expansion of a bill which Sir John McEwen had been
able to get through our predecessors over the oppositioh
of many Liberal Ministers, including Mr. McMahon was was at
that time the Treasurer. It was designed to give Australians
the opportunity to stake out a claim for a share in basic
industries. It was to prevent the takeover of those industries.
It was to give the national government the resources to
prevent a further erosion of Australian ownership and control
in basic industries. That was rejected by the Senate. Then
there was the Health Insurance legislation. There surely
could have been no program which had been so widely discussed.
It was discussed not only in the 1972 House of Representatives
elections, but in the 1969 House of Representatives elections.
It was discussed in the Senate elections in 1967 and 1970.
Our legislation completely accords with the program which we
outlined on so many occasions for the people. Then there is .4/ 
the Petroleum and Minerals Authority legislation. That has
been twice rejected by the Senate. It is designed to
enable the taxpayers through a government instrumentality
to take a share in the discovery of Australian natural
resources and the development of them. It would give the
opportunity for Australians through their own instrumentality
to learn the scientific and economic basis of these basic
industries, based on our natural resources. It follows
legislation which was the means by which France and Italy
and now Canada are taking a share in the discovery and the
development of-their resources. It would avoid the situation
which arose under our predecessors whereby 68.3% of our
energy resources our oil, our natural gas, our uranium and
our coal -are controlled from overseas. Add the metallic
resources -the iron ore, the bauxite, copper, lead, the
zinc, titanium, magnesium and so on and you still have
controlled from overseas. It was a means of avoiding
that overseas control becoming still more dominant. Twice
rejected by the Senate.
Then there are the electoral bills. In particular the
bills which would have given votes for the Senate for the
people enrolled in the two territories. We put the
proposition at the last two House of Representatives
elections I believe it's a proposition overwhelmingly
supported in the two territories but the Liberals,
Country Party take the attitude the Senate is a States
House. And then there was the legislation unanimously
recommended over 15 years ago that thca variation from the
average en rolment from electorates in any State should not
be more than 10%. You shouldn't have the present
The 10% maximum variation was endorsed by Country Party as
well as Liberal and Australian-Labor Party members of the
Constitutional Review Committee set up by Sir Robert Menzies
in 1956 reporting to the Parliament unanimously in 1958.
The legislation was twice rejected by the Senate. Now there
were other bills too, but I give those basic ones because
many of them are bills upon which the Governor-General said
the Parliament had become unworkable and therefore we were
entitled to have an election for the whole of both Houses
at the same time. 
Now, that's what we've done by way of legislation, in
carrying out oiir programs. Then, the rest of our programs-
I pointed out to you when I last spoke to you would be
based on expert advice. It was well known before we came
in that there was not in the state public services or in
the federal public service enough men and women who had been
given the responsibility of investigating and recommending
courses of action dealing with what were seen to be problems
for the Australian people, but problems which could not be
solved unless governments took some action about them. And
I'm reminded that I said at the gathering like this before
the elections in December 1972 the key channel for communication
between the Parliament and the people will be a
number of expert commissions making regular reports and
recommendations on new spending. These bodies will not
merely be exercises in more efficient, more expert
administration of public affairs they will be an expression
of our determination to keep the public informed and to keep
the public involved in the public debate on the great
national affairs and the great national decisions. We have
been as good as our word. We have where we've been able
to get the legislation through set up standing commissions.
The chairman, sometimes also the deputy chairman, have been
full time. But the rest of the men and women appointed to
those commissions have been experts in state public services,
universities and various professions and organisations. They
have been happy to serve on these bodies knowing that whether
the government accepted their recommendations or not the
Parliament and thus the people would be told what the
recommendations were. We've sought to end the situation
where the government was regarded as the only body which was
entitled to know what the experts recommended. And there
was before we came in a very great disillusion among
academics and heads of commerce and other organisations about
the use that they could be to the public, particularly in
advice given to governments. We have ended that suspicion,
we have involved them, there have been scores as you know
of professors and captains of industry and managing directors
and directors who have and state public servants as well 6/ 
as federal public servants who've been willing to be named
and identified among those who were advising the national
government. And in every case the report has been made
promptly available. It's been made available usually
before even the government has made up its mind upon them.
And the consequence has been that if the government has
differed or delayed on these reports, then the public was
able to make a judgement and assessment itself. It's
remarkable the extent to which there has been support for
and acceptance of these reports. And the big initiatives
we've taken in development of programs have been along
these lines, that is the increases in government
expenditure which we've undertaken have been on the basis
of public reports by experts which the public have themselves
received, and the cuts in public expenditure we've made,
amounting to well over 400 million dollars a year, have been
on the basis of such expert reports available to the public.
Now people don't demur at what's in these reports they
accept the facts. They acknowledge the validity of the
recommendation. It doesn't stop them criticising us when
we act upon them but in all these matters that we've clone
-the public's known why we did it on whose advice we acted
it's not been secret. It's not been delayed. It's been
available promptly and fully and we believe by this process
there's been a rational enquiry, rational development and
rational allocation of our natural resources and our human
resources such as no previous government has been willing
to bring about. And even while this campaign's been going
on there have been many such reports received. They're being
printed and a summary of them has been published. Now let
me mention some of them.
There is Sir James Vernon's report on the post office, the
biggest business in Australia but one which certainly needed
a review and investigation. And now that it has been made
available, Dr. Coombs will conduct the Royal Commission into
the rest of the Public Service. There has been no enquiry
into the Public Service in Australia for over 50 years.
There has been in the United States, Canada, Britain, so
many other countries but not here. We are the people who .7/ 
haethought about it. Then there's been Sir Walter Scott's
enquiry into government procurement. He pointed out the
inefficiencies, the waste, which have been caused by the
inherited system of purchase by the Australian Government.
Then there's Professor Crisp's report on the collection of
statistics and data. So often, departments and instrumentalities
have collected information and kept it to themselves,
not even given it to each other, still less the public. The
report here has been received and published. And I recall
the very significant ones that we've received previously.
It was Mr. Rattigan's committee'which gave us the basis for
the tariff cut across the board of 25%. It wag Sir John
Crawford's report which led to the transformation, the
strengthening, the widening of the tariff board into the
Industries Assistance Commission. It's now Tom Fitzgerald's
report which has made the public aware of the implications
of mining policies which we inherited. There's Professor
Karmel's various reports on the schools and on the open
university and there could have been no greater increase
in government expenditure on any subject than there has been
flowing from Professor Karmel's report on the schools. We
sdught it early, we published it immediately, we adopted it
in full and the Liberals in fact voted against the application
of the report twice, when it first came in both Houses and
in both Houses again when the Country Party and DLP at last
let it through. There's Professor Cochrane's report on adult
training and retraining. There's Mr. Cangen' s report on
technical education and further education and I conclude with
Mr. Justice Woodward's concluding report on the Aborigines.
Now, you will notice that these reports have been quite basic.
There have been no such wide-ranging basic reports into our
natural and human resources in the memory of anyone in this
room and they are all promptly available to you and to the
public. The only difficulty's been that after a dearth of
information before we camne in you've now had a flood of
information and we are accused of not letting the public
know fully the implications of our programs. I acknowledge
and I guess you, as practising journalists, would all
acknowledge the difficulty of getting through the full text .8/ 
8.
and facts and reconiunendations disclosed and made by these
expert bodies. But never let it be said that the public
wasn't fully informed. They were told what our objectives
were and when we have sought further advice they've been
told what the advice was. And I suppose this applies
particularly to the biggest new commitment that I've been
able to make on behalf of the government during this
campaign, and that is the commitment on the care and
education of boys and girls under five years of age. When
we came in, as I frankly admitted to you, and in my policy
speech before the December 72 elections, there was not the
information available in government circles state or
federal. There was no coordination of the information
between community groups and voluntary organisations. The
people who knew about these things had never been asked
for their views for the information, for the facts that
they had, their views as to what should be done about it.
We promptly asked a committee under Miss Joan Fry to make
a report on it. We asked the Social Welfare Commission,
under Mrs. Marie Coleman the first woman ever to be the
head of an Australian government instrumentality or
d~ partment we've asked the Priorities Review Staff in
the Department of the Special Minister of State to review
all these things, make recommendations and accordingly we
4 now have a fuller program than has even been proposed
before, for that 1,300,000 boys and girls under five
as many people under five as there are over 65. We would
never have ventured, surely, to neglect those 1.3 million
people over 65 as we have the 1.3 million under five. And
hundreds of thousands of them without anybody to look after
them no parent throughout the working day. Well, of
course it'll cost $ 130 million this coming financial year.
It's a very clear contrast to our opponents who would be
prepared to spend on this overall matter of day care and
pre-schools, $ 20 million a year. We've spent $ 18 million
in the last six months a big contrast. But you know why
we're doing it. Everybody's told. Nobody knew before we
collected the information and sought the advice. 
Now I suppose you'd expect me to say something about the
alternative package. I'm indebted to you for examining so
many aspects of it. It ought to be enough for me to refer
to some aspects myself. I gather there is to be in this
alternative package, if the public bought it, an incomes
and prices freeze. I must confess and I've devoted a great
deal of attention to the proposals, I find no company, no
organisation or employers or employees who is prepared to
support it and every country which has tried it over the
last year or so has now abandoned it. It was first started
on President Nixon' s support idea, two and a half years ago
in the United States, the Congress has at last abandoned it
as counter-productive, but one would have thought that any
effective freeze of prices would cover meat and fresh food.
Now, as one of my opponents has said, it's impossible it
may be possible to freeze meat and vegetables, but it's not
possible to freeze the pric~ es of it, and I'm not reassured
by my other opponent saying it can be done, it will be done.
Well, I wish they would agree on how it'd be done and then
of course there's the price of petrol the cat being let
out of the bag, the tiger being let out of the tank, the'
ESSO tank and the simple fact is that there is not a shred
of evidence to say that oil exploration in Australia is more
expensive or less profitable than in any other country in
the world. The only thing that's happened is that other
countries have usually put up their taxes and royalties very
highly. But we haven't. There's no need whatever to increase
the price of crude oil by 40% or any other percentage to
continue to get what has already been discovered in Australia
or to encourage people to go out and search further. If you
can't have a limitation on prices of such things as meat and
vegetables and fresh fruit, which everybody consumes, or the
price of petrol, which everybody directly or indirectly is
affected by, then it's very difficult to see how one can
have any limitation on prices by that method at all. And
then of course there's the freeze on incomes. I'm not impressed 
by the constant assertion that somehow the Arbitration
Commission's awards would be made inoperative. Now that
word does not come from Tony Eggleton, I'm sure it comes
from Ronald Ziegler, and the... but however impressive the
word may be, however impressed you may be by such statements
used in other circumstances, there is the fact that finally
the High Court would decide. And the Chief Justice, Sir
Garfield Barwick, said this in 1967 in the total wage case:
" The Parliament is unable itself to legislate the level of
wages to be paid, nor has it power to direct the Arbitrator
as to the level of wages he shall prescribe in the settlement
of a dispute as to wages." The constitutional power
requires that settlement of the dispute be left to the
arbitrator. I thought everybody knew that. I'm surprised
at anybody aspiring to be Prime Minister of the country
being ignorant of it or trying to conceal it. The fact is
that the only way to exclude the Arbitration Commission,
to make its awards inoperative, is to abolish it. As long
as it exists then, under the Constitution, it has the
authority to conciliate and arbitrate in the settlement
of industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any
one State. If you abolish the machinery, then of course,
like the inter-state commission, it can't exercise its
constitutional responsibility. I don't believe the
Australian public will support the idea of abolishing the
Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Now,
in all these matters I was not reassured by a statement
Mr. Douglas Anthony issued today. " Mr. Snedden and I have
had discussions to try to tie in all the loose ends and to
look for weaknesses that probably exist." Now I would have
thought that Mr. Anthony, who for twelve months has been
urging the absolutely unprecedented and unprincipled course
that a House of Representatives, recently elected, should
be refused the money to carry on its program by a Senate
half elected 3 years ago and half 6 years ago I'm
surprised that he should have been urging this course so long
without having been able to evolve an alternative program.
Perhaps it's not so much to be wondered at that Mr. Snedden
hadn't been able to do it. 11/ 
But let me show in practice what has been done in some of
these respects because the two Right Honourable Gentlemen
have, in the past, had responsibility in fiscal and monetary
matters let me deal with some of the monetary matters.
There was, as you know, a very big dispute between them and
their colleagues about the value of the dollar before
Christmas 1971 and in that Holy Season there was an unholy
row for three days and for three nights. And the wrong
decision was made. Again there was a dispute as to the
inflow of overseas funds on loan. And in consequence for
the six months before we came in, the amount of money
circulating in Australia rose by 17%, There was no
equivalent increase in production. In fact there were a
very great number of men and women out of work. Productivity
increased by the money supply by 17% and the Treasury and
the Reserve Bank had been urging them throughout the year to
do something about the value of the dollar and the inflow of
overseas funds. No legislation is required for those purposes.
All that is required is an administrative decision. When we
came in, promptly we examined the position, we accepted ' the
advice and everybody, including all the leading economists in
Australia, right up to today's letter, have endorsed what
we've done. And none of the things we've done have earned
many plaudits at the time. We have trodden on many toes,
special interest groups, they resent it I feel, I hear, but
undoubtedly the public has benefited from it. Now these
were tough decisions. They were decisions which had been
shirked by our predecessors, they were decisions which we
had promptly made.
I conclude with a reference which I gather Mr. Snedden made
to you yesterday and which he-had also made in the Parliament,
and I would have thought that he would have understood the
situation better by now. Because, not only was he formerly
a Treasurer and should have known some of these other matters 12/ 
I quoted, but he was also an Attorney General and he stated
as regards these referendums, that there was no need to
carry the referendum to syncronise the elections for the
two Houses, * but the fact that the elections for two
Houses were being held at the one time, next Saturday,
would automatically syncronise them. of course, the
Constitution says that when there's been a double dissolution
the term of the Senators will date from the 1st July
preceding. The Constitution also says that Members of the
House of Representatives can have three years term from
the first meeting of their House. That means that as the
Constitution stands, the Senators would have to come up for
election before July 1976, somewhere in May 1976. The
House of Representatives wouldn't have to face the people
again until July 1977. Now not only does the Constitution
say this, history bears it out, because after the last
double dissolution in 1951, there was another Senate
election in April 1953 and a House of Representatives
election in April 1954. So that is a very clear example
why that referendum should be carried. Because the next
election should be, again, for both Houses at the same.
time and that is what the first referendum is designed to
achieve, and it was recommended back in 1958 by the-
Constitution Review Committee appointed by Sir Robert
in 1956. Now, I won't go through the other referendums
there are equally valid reasons for all of them. Three
of them date from recommendations dating from 1958, the
fourth one, the local government one, dates from what I was
saying to you before the last elections, what had been in
the Party Platform before that. They're well known. Local
government should be involved in the Australian national
financial set up. Ratepayers alone cannot be expected to
finance the things which federal and state governments and
public services can't most appropriately supply, but which
these days can be best supplied on a local basis, by the
councils, community groups and voluntary organisations. .13/ 
13.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I've said enough, I think, to illustrate the differences
there are before the people next Saturday, and I believe
that the government deserves their support because it
has a complete program. It has stuck to that program.
It's tried to keep faith with the people and we have
made available to the people all the advice and the
facts on the further developments of programs which we
were committed to introduce. 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
QUESTION: Average weekly earnings for the March quarter
will be coming out in about two weeks time. They're expected
to show an increase in the past year of something like 17%.
They won't reflect the increases from the National Wage Case
or the GMH settlement or the Metal Trades Industries
Settlement that took place recently. Would you expect to
bump it up to something like 20 in the next two quarters.
The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has pointed out
that part of the reason for the increase is that the wage
system at the moment is allowing large parts of the
workforce to double up on the national increases that it's
awarding. Now I was wondering whether you could tell us
and it's called a conference, between the parties for the
national wage case... I was wondering whether you could tell
us what instructions representatives from a Federal Labor
Government would have if they attended such a conference and
whether you could be a little more explicit about the form
your intervention would take in cases coming up before the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission from the unions
that you said could be ( unclear)
PRIME MINISTER: The attitude we would take before this
conference this is the conference which the Arbitration
Commission said in its judgment on the 1974 National Wage
Case it would be holding in 6 months' time to consider to
evolve a formula for relating the wages, the award payments
which it set, to any increase in the cost of living. You
know to bring about automatic regular cost of living
adjustments. Is that the one you're referring to, Mr Bracken?
Yes Well the attitude we would take before that conference
would be in accordance with the brief on indexation which 
-2-
the Cabinet approved and which was put before the Commission
during its hearing of that case. Half of the industrial
disputes in Australia in the last year have been due to the
fact that people have resorted to direct action to maintain
the value of their award wages. And we believe that by
having a regular adjustment of those wages and salaries
every quarter or half-year whatever the Commission agreeswould
reduce that sort of pressure. Quite apart from
being a matter of elementary justice. The Commission's
predecessor did adopt that from about 1921 to 1953. And the
course neither promoted nor put a brake on inflation. The
effect of it'was neutral. So that is the attitude we
would take. I suppose the brief on indexation which the
Department of Labour prepared and which the Cabinet endorsed
for this recent case, would be reviewed. But nevertheless,
that is the general attitude we would take at this conference,
which you remember my colleague, Mr Clyde Cameron applauded
when the Commission announced it in its judgement.
QUESTION: The election campaign so far has been largely
a contest between yourself and Mr Snedden. Has Mr Snedden
performed better than you thought he would.
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose hie had to.
QUESTION: You referred at some length, during your speech
to the fact that your government has released a number of
reports on a number of matters. But I would like to point
out that on a number of major questions, such as revaluation,
tariff cuts, and the Coombs Report and a number of others;
no reports were seen before the Government made its decisions.
Now in cases like this, do you intend to continue making
decisions without releasing the reports on major matters
and only releasing reports on minor ones.
PRIME MINISTER: T he Coombs Report was released on the
same day as, and in company with, the Budget papers in
August. It was considered in the preparation of the
Budget four weeks before that. There were a very great
number of budgetary implications in the Coombs Report. If 
-3-
we had released the Coombs Report before the Budget came
in there would inevitably have been speculation as to what
would be in the Budget. The Coomnbs Report was accepted in
part, rejected in other parts and accepted with modifications
in other parts again. So this was clearly a budgetary
document. It was tabled with the budgetary documents.
And so it doesn't come into the category of matters where
you release a report before you have made a decision.
Tariff Board reports, Industries Assistance Commission
reports, as they now are, are released immediately unless
the Commission itself recommends that the publication of
the report would cause speculation. where it so recommends,
and it hasn't in any of its reports up till now, we would
not publish the reports until the Government's decision had
been announced. But we have published all its reports up
till now as soon as they have been able to be printed, even
if the decision hadn't been made, because the Commission
itself said there would not be speculation if those reports
were published as soon as they could be printed.
QUESTION: You were elected eighteen months ago partly on
a promise of open government. And I can see that there has
been a great deal more information available to the people
in the various commissions you set up. However you were
elected more specifically on a promise of a freedom of
information act. This has not yet been forthcoming, some
public servants might say that an intelligent politician
breaks a stupid promise. However I note that the Queen
renewed the promise in her speech last February. Sir, are
you having difficulties in getting this bill out of the
bureaucracy, are there difficulties in implementing a
freedom of information act, have you as one of your close
advisers said, and he is very close at the moment, been
snowed by the public service.
PRIME MINISTER: I did undertake to introduce a freedom
of information act. The Queen made the same promise when
she opened the last session of the last Parliament, and the
bill has been drafted. And in my policy speech on Monday
fortnight I sta-ted we will proceed with our freedom of
information act. We will also appoint a civil ombudsman and
that is in the same general context,-we have already appointed 
-4-
a military ombudsman. I have instructed the Public
Service Board they may have already done it to repeal
the statutory rule 34B which makes it illegal for public
servants to comment on these matters. It has been discussed
between the Public Service organisations and the Public
Service Board. And on the agreement between them, I have
directed that the rule be abolished. The whole question
of relations with the Public Service will be among the
terms of reference of the Coombs' Royal Commission into the
Public Service.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, I hadn't intended to ask you
this, but since you have just mentioned the point to us,
the understanding of those organisations with which some
of us are involved talking to the Public Service on
Section 34B is that far from repealing it, they are
devising a more complex, and in our view, no less
restrictive form of words, than exists at present. Now
if your understanding is that you have directed them to
repeal it, would you remind them that that was the
. intention.
PRIME MINISTER: No they are aware of it. I have told them
that there are to be no guidelines which are more
repressive than the regulation. The guidelines of course
wouldn't have the force of law. They would be a gloss
upon the provisions of the present act. But the regulations
which made certain courses illegal, are to be repealed.
I am told that the course I have directed to be taken, meets
the wishes of the Public Service organisations which have
been thrashed out in discussions with the Public Service
Board. I am rather sorry that it has taken so long, but I
am told that this is what they all wish now and so therefore,
at the earliest moment, I have done it. But the Public
Service Board, the public service organisations, all
interested people, will certainly be welcome to give their
views in writing and by word and through representatives, to
the Royal Commission on the Public Service. 
QUESTION: The formal structure fore pre-blection briefings
with the public service for the Opposition, fell through.
Do you intend to do anything about getting formal guidelines
for those properly working well before another election
and whether you are back in government, or whether you
are in opposition, will you work for rather more contact
with the public service for the opposition party during
the time before an election.
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't understand your question at
first, because I didn't realise you were referring to
briefings of spokesmen for the Opposition on these matters
during the run up to an election campaign. I made that
undertaking, I honoured it. Mr Cooley, the Chairman of
the Public Service Board, was immediately in touch with
Mr Snedden. You know the subsequent correspondence. I am
assured that what Mr Cooly offered to Mr Snedden was
fully in accordance with the British practice which I
undertook to apply in Australia. I have honoured my
obligations. I think it is a proper course. I don't
believe that any opposition should find itself in the
situation that we did, where the Public Service Board
had in fact sought permission from Mr McMahon to confer
with me and my designated shadow ministers, on any changes
in the case of a change of government and Mr McMahon wouldn't
allow the discussions to take place. I said that such
discussions should always take place. I might elaborate
that the difficulty for other members of the opposition
was that Mr Snedden would never designate who they would
be with. You couldn't have half a dozen people discussing
things with every permanent head of every department. But
I was perfectly willing for any person that he designated
as having the shadow responsibility for any department
to confer with the head of that department. But he never
designated any of them. He said he would nominate who
would be his ministers, he has never done it. If you can't
nominate who would be your Treasurer how can you nominate
who the lesser ones would be. Mr Snedden could have had
from the Public Service Board or from any permanent head
the full facilities that any Leader of the Opposition has had
in Britain. And I might point out that I have said that 
-6-
Mr Peacock for instance can be briefed by anybody in the
Foreign Affairs Department. I have said that Mr Snedden
can. And Mr Snedden has been fully briefed as to all
internal or external security arrangements to which the
Australia Government is a party. That is there is nothing
that I have said should be withheld from an alternative
Prime Minister.
QUESTION: Has there been any contact between the Opposition
and the public service during'the course of the Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: There have been. For instance,
Bill Hayden has done this with Mr Chipp, to give an instance
I know. I have heard of no instanc3 where an opposition
spokesman wanting to be briefed on a particular matter,
hasn't been given that opportunity. I know of no instance
where it has been refused.
QUESTION: May I join you in quoting from the transcript
of your address to the pre-1972 election Press Club Lunch
in which you were asked, " will you publish Treasury's
detailed economic forecasts" and you replied not in a
referendum context " Yes, yes, yes, I would publish the
Treasury's economic forecasts." You criticised Mr Bury
for not having done so. And you said " I have been quite
firm in not giving any undertakings to do things which I
wasn't quite certain that an incoming government could do
in the lifetime of the Parliament, elected on the 2nd of
next month." Does this mean that you have not been
successful yet in getting the Treasury's economic forecasts
published and that you will do so in the life of the next
Parliament? PRIME MINISTER: I still incline to the view that they
should be published. But the contrary view is pressed upon
me by the authors of these documents and I suppose I can
su mmarise their view without injustice to them by saying
that if what they forecast or advise is to become public
property, they would be more reticient in what they write
and advise. It is a point of view which I have to weigh
carefully. But there are other advisers to me, I suppose 
-7-
there is no mystery about it Dr Coombs and Professor Gruen
for instance, who believe that these should be published.
That is my inclination, but the Parliament didn't go its
full life as you know. I would certainly think that within
3 years from the date I gave that undertaking, I will be able
either to fulfil it or to acknowledge that in the light of
further advice I don't believe I should honour it. But
it is a worrying question. I can't be dogmatic about it.
I'm still inclined to the view that these should be
published but it's not easy to know what's done in other
countries and to what extent. It's something that I want
to discuss further on the spot with them. But I would
think that well before 2 December 1975 I will be able to
give you a clear reply to it.
QUESTION: Yesterday, one of your friends in the press
gallery, suggested that you were in a position to make
political capital out of the Victorian Liberal Attorney-
General's granting a fiat to a group of citizens to
challenge the legality of State aid. Could you tell Us
how you can make political capital out of the fact that
Mr Hartley is one of those people seeking to challenge the
policies granting aid to independent schools and also that
another was your appointee to the Schools Commission.
I think Mrs Turner is associated with the D. O. G. S. in
seeking to overturn what apparently is still the
Government's policies.
PRIME MINISTER: I've never discussed the matter with
Mrs Turner. The fact is of course that she is one of
the members of the Karmel Committee which was unanimous
on these points. It maybe that the lady has changed her
mind. The document was signed some time ago and I think
by Mr Hartley and Mrs Turner and the other 30 odd signatories
to it. But the point is that whatever their views might have
been then or might be now, there could be no challenge in
the High Court to this legislation unless a State Attorney-
General gave his permission, gave his fiat, his let-it-bedone.
For ten years D. O. G. S. and others have been seeking
the permission of a State Attorney-General, Liberal or Labor,
in every State, to allow a challenge to be made to 
-8-
Commonwealth legislation providing funds for Church
schools. For ten years they have contacted every Attorney-
General in every State of both sides of politics. And
Mr Wilcox's predecessor or predecessors as Liberal
Attorneys-General in Victoria over the last ten years
always refused their permission, their fiat. Mr Wilcox
has granted his. So whatever may be the view now or
then of Mrs Turner and Mr Hartley and the other estimable
signatories, the fact is that however many signed it,
whatever there were, whatever they said, it would never
have got to the High Court but for an Attorney-General
having at loast been found after ten years, to give his
permission for it to be taken to the High Court. Now
in these circumstances it is regretable that the hundreds
of thousands of dollars will have to spent out of our
taxes in resisting such a claim in the High Court. The
challenge would never have got there but for a State
Attorney-General having given his permission. And it
happens to be the Liberal Attorney-General of the State
of Victoria.
QUESTION: I would like to move from Australia to
Foreign Affairs. Would your government if returned press
nations on the litoral of the Indian Ocean to regard the
re-opened Suez Canal as a non-military area.
PRIME MINISTER: All nations, around the shores of the
Indian Ocean and on all the islands in it, want the Indian
Ocean to be kept free of great power rivalry. I can't
speak for the government of South Africa, I don't think
it has expressed a view on it, I am not aware of it. But
it is certain that every other nation in and around the
Indian Ocean seeks to keep the great power rivalry out of
it. They don't want the Soviet Union and the United States
to escalate their rivalry in the Indian Ocean. And the
re-opening of the Suez Canal would of course facilitate
the passage of the very large fleets of the two super powers,
from the Mediteranean into the Indian Ocean. Certainly as
I understand it, they all want the Suez Canal re-opened,
but they don't want the present naval activity to be
escalated. Every one of them is unaninous in that regard. 
-9-
And we have co-operated with them in the relevant
United Nations Committees.
QUESTION: Yesterday you told us that your government
would not increase direct or indirect taxes in the next
budget. Was this a decision made in consultation with
Mr Crean and also, does it mean that if taxation scales
are restructured that the high income earner will also
be excluded from taxation?
PRIME MINISTER: I hadn't had a specific discussion
with Mr Crean before I attended that particular press
conference at least I know who my Treasurer will be
before I hold press conferences but his general view is
the same as mine that there is no need to have an overall
increase in direct taxation or an overall increase in
indirect taxation in order to fulfil the programs which
we've initiated, both those which are under way and those
which we are about to launch. There are of course, very
many more men and women working and productivity increased
by 6 percent last year as against 2 per cent in the
previous year, 1972. And as I said in the Policy Speech
in November 1972, we believe that our programs can be
financed from increases in productivity rather than
increases in taxation. So I make the overall assessment
as to direct and indirect taxation. Now as regards direct
taxation, in particular, I have mentioned the restructuring
of the tax scales it's a term I used in November 1972 and it's
a term I used last month. I've used it on both occasions
and it's the term I repeat now. And I've spoken on both
occasions in the context of the committee of inquiry into
taxation under Mr Justice Asprey, which Mr Snedden appointed
in September 1972. We supported the appointment of it and
Mr Crean and I have discussed these matters with
Mr Justice Asprey I myself of course have known him, oh
I suppose for well over thirty years and with members of
that committee. We haven't of course sought to know what
its recommendations will be, but we have asked that the
recommendations'be in our hands by 1 June that will give
us plenty of time to discuss the matters before we have our
Cabinet meeting on the Budget in August, which will be about 
4 weeks before we introduce the Budget in September. The
only suggestion that we've made to the Asprey Committee
which is not in its terms of reference as settled by
Mr Snedden is that it should consider taxation discrimination
against women. There was no such reference in its terms
of reference, we think there should be and we believe
that it will take that into account when it makes
recommendations on the whole range of matters. We have
not pre-empted the findings of this very expert committee.
QUESTION: In your first Budget you had a 20 percent
increase in government spending, you increased indirect
taxation and you had a deficit budget. How would you
have in your 1974/ 75 budget tax cuts, and a 20 percent
increase in government spending and how would be balance
the budget or bing down a surplus budget?
PRIME MINISTER: We might be in balance this year.
There's about seven weeks to go before the final accounts
for the year come in. We did budget for a deficit this
year but in fact we mightn't have a deficit. We might be
in balance this year, but as I believe that every economist
would advise in times when there is inflation, it is
inflationary to budget for a deficit, and we would therefore
expect to balance our budget or even, if other commitments
could still be met, to have a surplus budget this year.
Now your reference about a 20 percent increase. I take it
you are making a selective quotation from what was said
by me on Frost which you'll all be watching tonight.
Now perhaps I could get the quotation from this here just
to put in in full context. Mr Snedden apparently has given
Mr Frost some question to ask me, and one was about this
business with Syntec Newsletter, the people who brief
Mr Malcolm Fraser about whom Mr Snedden has at least said
he won't be Treasurer. Now, Mr Frost asked me: " would
there be an expansion needed by less than 40 percent but
more than zero" and I said yes. " What would you guess it
was" " midway, midway around 20 percent. Off hand I'd say
that, obviously there would be that amount in some fields
and less than that in others." " But the average would average
out at about 20 percent maybe, but'I wouldn't think any more 
-11-
than that." I should make it plain that the expenditure
by governments in the last year in Australia has not gone
up by as high a percentage as the expenditure by
individuals and companies. Government expenditure is
not rising by the overall national percentage.
QUESTION: Sir, in answer to the first question that
was asked today by Warrick Bracken, you said that the use
of the cost of living adjustment or indexation of wages
had neither promoted nor put a break on inflation, that
means it's useless as I've said. What then, in view of
your assessment of the uselessness of indexation as a
measure against wage cost inflation, do you propose to
control the problem which Warrick Bracken referred to,
of 20 percent and above increases in the wage costs
that are in prospect?
PRIME MINISTER: You would not be correct in taking
it that I said it would be useless. What I did say is,
it would bring justice to the mean and women working under
the awards of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission, I also said it would promote harmony in
industry. It would do both those things.
QUESTION: But you were saying it would be useless as an
economic tool against inflation, I take it.
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not saying one does it in the
context of inflation at all. It is neutral in its effect
on inflation. May I repeat again so you can take it
correctly. It will lead to justice for the mean and women
working under federal awardsand it will bring about harmony
in industry. Both are worthy objectives. It was for those
reasons that we sought indexation from the Commission in
the 1974 National Wage Case, it is for those reasons that
the Commission, for the first time for twenty years, decided
to consider the matter. It will do so within six months
we will promote that conference. 
-12-
QUESTION: I was going to ask you about housing but last
night down at Chelsea Town Hall, you said that you would,
the Labor Party could, get Issacs, Henty, Deaking and even
Flinders and Bruce. Mr Hawke said earlier this week that
the Labor Party could win by 20 seats. Mr Snedden said
last week that he could win by 15. Are you prepared to
give us a prediction now and if not could you tell us
what your views are on the wisdom of political leaders
making such forecasts?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm much more in agreement with Mr Hawke
than with Mr Snedden. I don't necessarily volunteer these
matters, but if I'm asked a question, of course I give a
civil reply and I believe a sensible one. I'm going to
treat you bush lawyers with respect. You're all the members
of the same rat pack as far as I'm concerned. I wish I
had the same freedom to pontificate as you have. Now
I want utter silence while I give this answer. You ought
to bring your wives and companions round during the trip
you know, it makes you much more agreeable. This has been
the most unharried, harmonious meal we've been able to
have for over a fortnight.........
PRIME MINISTER: The choice on Saturday is between a
confused and divided Opposition and a strong, united
Government. It's between an Opposition confused and
divided on inflation and a government which has shown it
can take tough courses of action to cure inflation. Its
between an Opposition whose policies brought about
inflation and a Government whose policies have produced
the biggest drop in the rate of inflation during the
March quarter of any of the worlds large industrial and
trading nations. Its between an Opposition pledged to
the sell out of Australian resources and a government
pledged to preserve and promote Australian ownership.
Its between an Opposition committed to cut back schools
expenditure by $ 300 million a year and a government that
has opened wide the door to new educational opportunities
for all Australian children. Its between an Opposition
representing rich sectional interests and a government 
-13-
representing all the people. Its between turning back
and moving forward. I believe the Australian people will
move forward. Forward to a brighter and better future. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Mi. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE CAIRNS CIVIC CENTRE,
CAIRNS, QUEENSLAND,
FRIDAY 31 M. AY 1974
THIS IS A VERY HAPPY OCCASION FOR ME. WHATEVER YOU
MAY THINK OF. MY FEELINGS TOWARDS QUEENSLAND, THERE CAN BE NO
DOUBT ABOUT MY FEELINGS TOWARDS CAIRNS. I CAME HERE FOR A FEW
DAYS JUST BEFORE THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN; I AM HERE AGAIN
IMMEDIATELY AFTER IT. I AM DELIGHTED THAT MY FIRST OFFICIAL
DUTY SINCE THE RE-ELECTION OF THE GOVERNMENT IS TO OPEN THIS
SPLENDID CIVIC CENTRE IN CAIRNS. IT WILL CONFIRM YOUR POSITION
AS QNE OF THE MOST PROSPEROUS AND DYNAMIC PROVINCIAL CITIES IN
AUSTRALIA. THE PLANNING OF THIS CENTRE BEGAN JUST TWO WEEKS AFTER
THE GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED IN 1972. 1 BELIEVE IT SYMBOLISES TWO
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S PRINCIPAL CONCERNS: ITS COMMITMENT TO THE
ARTS AND ITS COMMITMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT. YOU HAVE BEGUN
SOMETHING IN THIS CITY WHICH I HOPE WILL SERVE AS A MODEL NOT
ONLY FOR THE REST OF OUEENSLAND BUT FOR THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA.
OF ALL THE AUSTRALIAN STATES, QUEENSLAND IS BY FAR THE MOST
DECENTRALISED. IT HAS MANY THRIVING RURAL CENTRES. THE
VIGOUR, THE INDIVIDUALITY, THE VITALITY OF YOURS RURAL AND
PROVINCIAL CITIES SHOW HOW IMPORTANT IT IS FOR OTHER STATES
AND REGIONS TO CULTIVATE SIMILAR GROWTH CENTRES AWAY FROM
THE CAPITAL CITIES. 
-2-
TO DO SO IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT CITIES LIKE CAIRNS SHOULD ENJOY
THE SAME FACILITIES FOR CULTURE AND RECREATION THAT ARE AVAILABLE
TO THE PEOPLE OF BRISBANE, SYDNEYAND MELBOURNE. THIS CENTRE
IS AN EXCELLENT EXAMPLE OF WHAT CONCERNED AND VIGOROUS LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CAN ACHIEVE WITH THE SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION OF
YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT AND THE LOCAL PEOPLE. I CONGRATULATE ALL
THOSE WHO HAVE WORKED FOR THIS BUILDING AND FOR THE IDEALS AND
PURPOSES IT EMBODIES.
THERE IS, PERHAPS, AN ADDED SIGNIFICANCE IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A CULTURAL CENTRE HERE IN CAIRNS. YOU STAND
AT THE MEETING POINT OF THREE CULTURES THE EUROPEAN, THE
ABORIGINAL AND THE TORRES STRAIT ISLAND. I BELIEVE YOU ARE
IN A UNIQUE POSITION TO ABSORB AND DISSEMINATE IDEAS AND STYLES
MAY
WHICHIWELL PROVE, IN THE LONGER PERSPECTIVE OF HISTORY, TO-BE
OF IMPORTANCE TO THE WHOLE WORLD.
WHEN MY GOVERNMENT SET OUT TO IMPLEMENT ITS POLICY IN
THE ARTS IT FACED SOME DIFFICULT'DECISIONS, THEY SPRANG FROM
THE FACT THAT WHILE AUSTRALIA WAS RICH IN ARTISTIC TALENT,
AND PROBABLY POTENTIALLY RICHER THAN ANYONE CAN EASILY IMAGINE,
IT LACKED THE RESOURCES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THAT TALENT.
VAST AREAS OF THE COUNTRY WERE WITHOUT EITHER THE PEOPLE OR THE
PLACES WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE TO THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE ARTS. YET IF WE WERE TO DEVOTE OUR AVAILABLE FUNDS TO
BUILDING THE PLACES, WE WOULD NOT HAVE THE FUNDS TO SPEND ON
THE PEOPLE. ./ 3 
-3-
So WE WERE FORCED TO ESTABLISH CERTAIN PRIORITIES, AND OUR
PRIORITIES WERE THESE: FIRST, TO SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES,
TO MAINTAIN AND PROMOTE STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE; THEN TO SUPPORT
THE TRAINING OF ARTISTS, WHICH WOULD PRODUCE THE NEXT GENERATION
OF CREATIVE TALENT; THEN TO SUPPORT ACTIVITIES WHICH WOULD
INVOLVE COMMUNITIES, TO ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF LIFE AND ENSURE
AUDIENCES, WITHOUT WHICH NO ARTIST CAN SURVIVE; AND FINALLY TO
COLLABORATE WITH OTHER BODIES, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE, TO GIVE THE
ARTS A BROADER.. BASE OF SUPPORT THAN A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ALONE
CAN PROVIDE. I AM GLAD TO SEE THAT HERE IN CAIRNS WE HAVE A PROJECT
IN WHICH ALL THESE OBJECTIVES CAN BE ACHIEVED. YOU HAVE CHOSEN
BY YOUR OWN INITIATIVE TO CREATE A CENTRE OF ACTIVITY, AND YOU
HAVE HAD THE SUPPORT OF YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT IN DOING SO.
YOU WILL BE LOOKING TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. FOR SUPPORT
FOR THE ACTIVITIES HERE, AND SO LONG" AS YOU AIM FOR EXCELLENCE
AND FOR THE WIDEST COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT, THAT SUPPORT WILL
NOT BE LACKING. THE ORGANISATION OF THIS CENTRE SHOWS THAT YOU HAVE
GOT YOUR PRIORITIES RIGHT, EXACTLY RIGHT. THE CITIES OF THE
WORLD ARE LITTERED WITH BUILDINGS ERECTED WITH THE BEST OF
INTENTIONS, BUT WITH A POOR UNDERSTANDING OF THE NEEDS OF THE
ARTS AND THE NEED OF LOCAL COMMUNITIES. CAIRNS IN THE FUTURE
WILL HAVE SOMETHING VERY DIFFERENT; A BUILDING CREATED IN
RESPONSE TO LOCAL" NEEDS. 
THE FACT IS THAT MANY OF THE MOST ORIGINAL AND
CONSTRUCTIVE ENTERPRISES IN THE ARTS HAVE COME FROM QUEENSLAND.
YOU DEVELOPED THE IDEA OF THE FLYING ARTS SCHOOL; YOU HAVE
MADE GREAT PROGRESS IN SUCH'FIELDS AS YOUTH ORCHESTRAS AND
YOUNG OPERA GROUPS. YOU HAVE MANAGED TO BUILD UP A RANGE OF
ACTIVITIES WHICH SERVE THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE WELL AND DO YOU
GREAT CREDIT. I MIGHT MENTION THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
THROUGH THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AND ITS BOARDS,
HAS ALREADY GIVEN MORE THAN $ 500,000 IN VARIOUS FORMS OF
SUPPORT TO THE STATE, AND A GOOD PART OF IT HAS GONE TO THE
NORTHERN PART OF QUEENSLAND.
IN THE PERFORMING ARTS, $ 130,000 HAS GONE TO THE
QUEENSLAND THEATRE COMPANY AND $ 35,000 TO THE TWELFTH MIGHT
THEATRE; THE QUEENSLAND BALLET COMPANY HAS RECEIVED $ 25,000
AND THE QUEENSLAND OPERA COMPANY $ 49,000. THE LARGEST SHARE
OF THE LITERATURE BOARD GRANTS TOTALLING $ 45,000 WENT TO
INDIVIDUAL WRITERS TO ALLOW THEM MORE TIME FOR WRITING.
THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD HAS GIVEN GRANTS TOTALLING $ 57,09n
TO INDIVIDUAL ARTISTS AS WELL AS $ 21,000 TO THE EASTAUS
ARTS SCHOOL, THE FLYING ARTS SCHOOL WHICH TAKES PAINTING
TO OUTBACK AREAS: $ 7,500 TO THE TOWNSVILLE ARTS SOCIETY
AND VARIOUS AMOUNTS TO OTHER GROUPS SUCH AS THE SOCIETY OF
SCULPTORS OF QUEENSLAND. 
THE QUEENSLAND FESTIVAL OF ARTS RECEIVED A $ 10,0' n)
GRANT AND THE TOlWNSVILLE PACIFIC FESTIVAL $ 2,000; THE CHILDRENS
CREATIVE ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATION $ 3,040 AND THE MT. [ SA CULTURAL
VACATION SCHOOL $ 2,130. CRAFTSMEN RECEIVED GRANTS TOTALLING
$ 42,000 AND MUSIC GENERALLY $ 132,000. AMONG THE MUSIC GRANTS
WAS ONE OF $ 12,360 TO THE OUEENSLAND CONSERVATORIUM OF MIUSIC
TO MAINTAIN A STRING QUARTET IN RE SIDENCE. ALONG WITH THESE
GRANTS $ 48,000 HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE QUEENSLAND DIVISION OF
THE ARTS COUNCIL SPEC IFICALLY FOR TOURING PERFORMANCES IN
COUNTRY AREAS. THERE WAS ALSO A $ 10,000 GRANT FROM THE
FILM AND TELEVISION BOARD FOR THE PURCHASE OF EQUIPMENT FOR
THE BRISBANE FILM-MAKERS CO-OPERATIVE.
OUR COMMITMENT TO THE ARTS MUST BE SEEN IN
CONJUJNCTION WITH OUR COMMITMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, FOR
PARTICIPATION IN THE ARTS, AND ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS OFTEN
REFLECT LOCAL NEEDS, LOCAL TASTES AND, IN MANY CASES, LOCAL
CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL INFLUENCES. By PROMOTING MORE
VIGOROUS LOCAL GOVERNMENT WE ARE THEREFORE CULTIVATING A
MORE FERTILE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE ARTS CAN PROSPER.
LET ME GIVE YOU SOME IDEA OF WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA, AND PARTICULARLY IN QUEENSLAND.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH FOR THE 1972 ELECTIONS I SAID: " LET
THERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT LABOR'S DETERMINATION TO MAKE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM."
THAT DETERMINATION STILL STANDS. IT WAS REITERATED IN MY
POLICY SPEECH FOR THE ELECTION ON 18 MAY IN THESE TERMS: 
-6-
" WE HAVE SOUGHT TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A
GENUINE PARTNER IN AUSTRALIA'S FEDERAL SYSTEM,
WE HAVE REMODELLED THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO
ALLOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO MAKE
SUBMISSIONS AND TO ALLOW THE COMMISSION TO
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE AMOUNTS OF MONEY
NEEDED TO REDUCE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS
AND WITHINSTATES AS TRADITIONALLY IT USED TO
DO AS BETWEEN THE STATES,
" THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE
REAL ANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISM, UNDER
A VARIETY OF PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL
GOVERNMENT WITH THE FUNDS TO UNDERTAKE A RANGE
OF ACTIVITIES PREVIOUSLY INADEQUATELY CARRIED
OUT OR TOTALLY NEGLECTED, THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN, THE PROGRAMS FOR COMMUNITY
HEALTH, AREA IMPROVEMENT, THE NATIONAL ESTATE,
THE ARTS, TOURISM AND RECREATION AND ABORIGINES
ALL THESE PROVIDE FUNDS FOR COMMUNITY
ACTIVITIES TO BE ORGANISED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
WE DELIBERATELY HAVE MADE AND SHALL MAKE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT A VEHICLE FOR OUR LEGISLATION ON
AGED PERSONS'. HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED
EMPLOYMENT, HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, MEALS ON
WHEELS, HOME CARE AND NURSING, NURSING HOMES
AND HOMELESS MEN AND WOMEN, THESE ARE ALL
ACTIVITIES WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELY REGULATED
FROM THE CENTRE AND ARE BEST PLANNED AND
IMPLEMENTED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORKING WITH
LOCAL COMMUNITIES, THEY JUSTIFY ASSISTANCE
FROM THE NATION'S FINANCES BUT NOT INCREASES
IN RATES, ,/ 7 
-7
" WE INSISTED ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION
AT THE CONVENTION ON THE CONSTITUTION IN
SEPTEMBER LAST YEAR. VIE MADE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
REPRESENTATION A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION
BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
" AT THAT CONVENTION I PUT THE CASE FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION ON THE LOAN COUNCIL.
THE PREMIERS THEN, AND AT A SPECIAL PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE IN OCTOBER, TURNED DOWN OUR PROPOSAL
THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD HAVE A VOICE AND
A VOTE IN THE LOAN COUNCIL."
WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW REGIONAL
GROWTH CENTRES IN QUEENSLAND. AFTER CONSULTATION WITH STATE
AUTHORITIES, THE CITIES COMIMISSION IN 1973 UNDERTOOK INITIAL
DEVELOPMENT STUDIES OF THREE AREAS IN QUEENSLAND TOWNSVILLE,
THE'FITZROY REGION AND THE MORETON REGION. OUR BUDGET LAST
YEAR~ ALLOCATED $ 14.4 MILLION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THESE
REGIONS IN THE CURRENT FINANCIAL YEAR. A REQUEST FOR A
DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILITY STUDY OF THE CAIRNS REGION HAS BEEN
RECEIVED BY THE CITIES COMMISSION FROM THE FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND
DEVELOPMENT BUREAU. THIS HAS BEEN SUPPORTED BY THE CAIRNS
CITY COUNCIL. THE COMMISSION HAS INDICATED TO THE COUNCIL
AND THE BUREAU THAT IT WILL CONSIDER THIS REQUEST WHEN ITS
FUTURE STUDIES PROGRAM IS BEING PREPARED. OFFICERS OF THE
COMMISSION HAVE DISCUSSED THIS MATTER, AND OTHER MATTERS OF
MUTUAL INTEREST, WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL. AND THE
BUREAU. 191 / 8 
-8-
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF OTHER PROJECTS I SHOULD
MENTION THAT ARE OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO CAIRNS. NEW AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN CAIRNS WERE-COMPLETED IN DECEMBER 1973
AT A COST OF $ 730,000. A TELEPHONE ENGINEERING CENTRE AND
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR CENTRE ARE UNDER CONSTRUCTION AT A
COST OF $ 760,000 IN ADDITION, WE ARE CARRYING OUT
EXTENSIONS TO THE CAIRNS TELEPHONE EXCHANGE AT A COST OF
$ 760,000, WE. ARE BUILDING A NEW WORKS DEPOT FOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION AT A COST OF $ 154,000
AND EXTENDING THE LEVEE BANKS OF THE CAIRNS AIRPORT AT A
COST OF $ 158,00, PROPOSED ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO THE
CAIRNS POST OFFICE WILL COST A FURTHER $ 207,000.
I WANT TO LEAVE YOU IN NO DOUBT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
CONTINUING CONCERN FOR THE PROSPERITY AND DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR
CITY, YOUR REGION AND YOUR STATE. WITH THIS BUILDING,
CAIRNS HAS PLACED ITSELF IN THE FOREFRONT OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FOR THE ARTS. IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO DECLARE OPEN
THE FIRST STAGE OF YOUR CULTURAL COMPLEX. IT WILL GIVE ME
GREATER AND CONTINUING PLEASURE TO REVISIT YOUR CITY, TO
OBSERVE ITS GROWTH AND PROSPERITY, AND SEE THE IMPORTANT
CONTRIBUTION OF THIS NEW CIVIC CENTRE TO THE LIFE AND
HAPPINESS OF YOUR CITIZENS, 



EMBARGO: 8.15 P. m.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE 21ST SYDNEY FILM FESTIVAL,
STATE THEATRE, SYDNEY, SUNDAY. 2 JUNE 1974
one of the most impressive aspects of the recent
election campaign was the public involvement and commitment of
men and women whose voices are not often heard in political affairs.
For me, there was no better, no more moving an example of this
than a meeting here in the Sydney Opera House only 5 days before
the people went to the polls.
On that day, about 20 men and women stood with me
before a capacity crowd in the Concert Hall and declared their
allegiance. My appreciation of their action was in no way diminished,
of course, by the fact that they declared their support for the
Government which I lead. Those men and women represented various
groups and occupations in our community. But, appropriately, in
Sydney's most striking symbol of cultural endeavour, the biggest
single group consisted of artists: novelists, poets, painters,
actors, producers and the like. I don.' t believe any of them will
feel belittled if I say they were led by bur only Nobel Prize
winner for literature, Patrick White.
These men and women did not talk simply about the
arts. Some stressed their belief in the need for Australia to
maintain a modern and independent stance in foreign policy. Some
stressed their concern about the environment and conservation
a concern which would have been particularly pertinent if stated
in this remarkably ornamented theatre. Some stressed a more
general concern about the type of society they wanted Australia to
be: Patrick White, for example, wanted to ensure the end of what
he described in a somewhat startling phrase as " the mental
constipation" of the past.
Nevertheless, a dominant concern for all of these
people was for the future of their own fields, for the future of
the arts in Australia. I don't think it is vain of me to say that they
believed that the present Australian government has done more for the
arts than any previous Australian government. I appreciated greatly
the willingness of those and other Australian artists to acknowledge
just what we have done. In politics, one doesn't always expect
such acknowledgements to be given. In this case, it was; and, if
I can be so bold, I believe that that recognition was justified.
Indeed through the Australian Council for the Arts alone, the
Australian government is providing $ 14 million for support to the
arts in Australia this financial year. In other words, our assistance
is twice that of 1972/ 73. Response to our new program has been
overwhelming. The Council for the Arts has received about 4,000
applications in the last year for assistance for various art forms
and has provided about 1,600 grants.,
One of the major objectives of our program has been to
help our artists in the pursuit of excellence. This pursuit would
not be possible if they did not have financial security. it is fair
to assume that already hundreds of Australians who would otherwise
be working in other fiplds or in other countries are now pursuing
professional careers in the arts in Australia for the first time.
/ 2 
-2-
The continued security of our artists, however, must
always depend on community support. That i ' s why our program has
emphasised the need to encourage the spread of interest and
participation in the arts throughout our society. In turn, this can
only be aided by the achievement of another major objective; for
the arts to help provide an expression of a national identity.
I believe the aim of community support is already starting to be
achieved. In a small way, the meeting at the Opera House 3 weeks
ago demonstrated this. Not many years ago, one might have expected
a lot of Australians to be unimpressed by a statement of endorsement
by a group of artists. Now, I think, Australians generally have
become sufficiently proud of their . achievements to pay attention
to them. In no area has the need for Australians to have the
opportunity to pursue excellence, to encourage community support and
to express a national identity been greater than in the film industry.
Although it had a vigorous anxd promising beginning, it has languished
for years. Yet there is no question that we have had people of
talent who have craved the chance to restore the industry, to create
worthwhile Australian films and to reach an Australian audience.
We are determined to give them that chance.
The prospects for the film industry look very bright
at present. Last year, seven Australian feature films were produced.
Already in 1974 nine Australian feature films * are in production in
addition to one financed by American interests. A further 16 feature
film projects are being planned and six of them are expected to go
into production during the next 12 months. Not only has there been
a great improvement in the number of films being produced in the
last two years; there has also been a great improvement in the
public response to those films. There have been several notable
examples of films which have attracted large crowds to our main
city cinemas. The Australian Government is seeking to ensure this
recent trend will develop further. It is making financial assistance
for film making available through two government bodies the Film
and Television Board of the Australian Council for the Arts and the
Australian Film Development Corporation. Since its formation in
February last year, the Film and Television Board has made 407 grants
worth nearly $ 2 million. These grants were given to individual film
makers and to organisations, such as film co-operatives to help
establish cinemas and distribute independently produced Australian
films; to the National Film Theatre for nationwide screenings of
films of specialised interests; and to film festivals in Sydney,
Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth. The Board has established a number
of community access video centres in the western suburbs of Sydney
and Melbourne and has similar plans for Brisbane, Adelaide, Whyalla
and Fremantle. The Board also plans to provide a cinema in each
capital city to show Australian films and for use by non-commerical
film makers and organisations for screenings, workshops and seminars. / 3 
-3-
The other main arm of Government assistance, the
Film Development Corporation, has helped with the financing and
promotion of feature films. It has recently been involved, for
example, in the promotion and exhibition of " The Cars that Ate Paris"
at the Cannes Film Festival. The Film Development Corporation
will soon be replaced by the Australian Film Commission. This
follows the Government's acceptance of a number of major recommendations
by the Tariff Board which enquired last year into motion picture films
and television programs. Cabinet has agreed that the new Film
Commission should be able to provide up to half the budget for an
Australian film. And in addition, to provide a promotion subsidy
for such a film. The precise amount of money to be made available
to the Commission is still being considered but it can expect more
funds than have been available to the Film Development Corporation.
I realise that there is still pressure within the film
industry for a major change in the distribution and exhibition
system for films within Australia. The Tariff Board did make some
recommendations in this area. But Cabinet considered that the
Constitutional barriers to the implementation of these recommendations
were too great. Nevertheless we will continue to watch this area of
the industry carefully to ensure as much as we can that the films
released from Australia's New Wave receive adequate distribution
and exhibition. The Government of course doesn't seek to stifle
the showing of overseas films in Australia. On the contrary, it is
part of our statedpolicy for all the arts that Australians can see
important works from overseas. A large canvas which hangs in
another public building in this city is controversial testimony to
that desire. Similarly, we regard it as important that film makers
and filmgoers are able to see the range of films that is offered at
a festival such as this. As the Sydney Film Festival comes of age,
I am glad, as the Head of a Government which has provided support
for its activities, to declare it open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT A NATURALIZATION CEREMONY, LIVERPOOL COUNCIL CHAMBERS,
3 JUNE 1974
Australia has just come through a national election in
which, whatever you may hear to the contrary, there were clear
winners and clear losers. In the decision you are taking here this
evening, however, there are no losers, only winners. The nation
wins, because each new citizen represents an increase in the strength
of our national family and our national spirit. And each of you, as
a new citizen, wins personally from your choice to become an
Australian. By accepting our invitation to citizenship, you have
reaffirmed your earlier, perhaps hesitant, decision to seek your
future among us. Tonight you are identifying yourself officially
for the first time as Australians but you are not relinquishing
anything you hold dear from your past life. Since the arrival of the
first fleet in 1788, new settlers have been linking their own
future with that of this land people of two worlds blending in a
new loyalty to Australia. This has been our history and our strength
and is no less true tonight. You are adopting the most realistic
stance that you could adopt, one that accords with both the past and
the future, with your own interests and with the nation's interests.
Tonight you are acknowledging that your future is here
in Australia, but you are not attempting to sever the old roots that
will bind you forever to your first homeland. No one can dictate
to you what your deepest feelings should be what should be in your
heart tonight and I would not dare to try. Let me just say that
your official status from tonight confers on you two grounds for
pride, based on the strength of two cultures, two life-styles,
your ' share of the heritage'. In that respect you are to be envied
above those of us,, who share only one common heritage.
The cumulative impact of the 817,000 people who since
1949 have joined the national family-through citizenship has been
to change the very concept and content of that citizenship. Today,
people from more than 70 nations make up Australia, a nation
subservient to none, firmly and responsibly seeking its own destiny.
In the electorate of Werriwa alone, at the last census there were
57,000 people born overseas nearly one third of the total population
of the electorate. Thus we are creating a cohesive society of many
parts, where cultural diversity can lend interest, charm and enjoyment
to the national life without forfeiting that harmony, that inner sense
of belonging ' together with' is the expression of true nationhood.
One solid foundation for that harmony must be in
equal and indivisible citizenship rights. For that reason the
Government has already moved to end all discrimination in the conditions
of citizenship. Today we have one criterion, one oath, one ceremony,
with all discrimination banished. We make no distinctions on the
grounds of national origin or former citizenship, and certainly none
on the grounds of race. / 2 
-2-
The widespread approval given to this new approach is
shown by the great increase in the rate of citizenship applications
under the new provision which became operative on 1 December 1973.
In 1972 a total of 38,402 people were granted citizenship. In 1973
this figure jumped to 57,102 an increase of nearly 50%. Further,
for the four months up to the end of April this year citizenship
applications continued to increase at an even higher rate. The verdict
of those who in the past eighteen months have decided to join the
national family cannot be denied Australian citizenship today is
more desirable than at any time in our history. The symbols of a
strong independent nationhood are not a cheap gimmick, an empty
gesture meant to impress ourselves rather than the world. There is
a wide and deep current of agreement in our society about what our
true national identity should be.
There is another quite objective statistical measure
of the confidence migrants now feel in Australia's future. The success
of a national immigration program is shown not only in the personal
efforts and sacrifices of those establishing themselves in a new land.
It is revealed in the statistics of those who, having tried the
great adventure, leave Australia with no intention of returning.
Since the Labor Government came to power, these figures have declined
from 33,172 in 1972 to 30,325 last year. This is the first
significant decline since 1964 in what we call the ' migrant drift',
and represents a resurgence of optimism in what Australia offers to
newcomers. Many of the things which have persuaded you, and thousands
of your fellow-migrants, to become Australian citizens are the result
of one man's efforts on behalf of our migrant people. That man is
Al Grassby, the Minister for Immigration a great friend, a stalwart
colleague, a true patriot, a fine Australian. No one has worked
harder for the welfare of migrants and achieved more solid and lasting
benefits for them and their families. It is a sad and bitter blow to
O me and the government that we have temporarily lost the services of
Al Grassby. It is a tragic irony that the forces he opposed so
staunchly and successfullyas a Minister, as a member of Parliament
the forces of hate, of prejudice, of ignorance, of racial
distrimination have now helped to defeat him. I know you will regret
this event as profoundly as I do. I know you will repudiate the
campaign tactics used against him, just as I and all decent Australians
repudiate them. They have no place in Australia, they have no place
in the kind of open and tolerant society that Al Grassby worked so
hard to achieve. I pay tribute to him here tonight. Ceremonies such
as this, here and all over Australia, are eloquent testimony to the
achievements of his public career, the strength of his character, the
breadth of his vision and the power of his ideals.
On behalf of the Australian Government and people Ii
welcome you all as new citizens of our nation and wish you every
happiness and success in the future. 



OPENING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. EgG. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, CANBERRAV
ON 7 JUNE 1974
IT IS NEARLY TWELVE MONTHS SINCE WE LAST MET IN THIS
CHAMBER. IT HAS BEEN A MOMENTOUS PERIOD. OVERSHADOWING THE
PAST TWO MONTHS HAS BEEN THE ELECTION. BUT THAT IS NOW BEHIND
US, THE PEOPLE HAVE RETURNED MY PARTY TO OFFICE AND WE ARE NOW
GETTING ON WITH THE BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT,
THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE PROGRAMS OF SOCIAL
PROGRESS WHICH IT HAS GOT UNDER WAY SINCE DECEMBER 1972. THOSE
PROGRAMS HAVE GREATLY EXPANDED THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO
AUSTRALIANS, BOTH AS INDIVIDUALS AND AS MEMBERS OF COMMUNITIES.
MANY OF THEM, OF COURSE, INVOLVE THE CO-OPERATION OF THE STATES
AND THEIR INSTRUMENTALITIES. IN MY OPENING SPEECH AT THIS CONFERENCE LAST YEAR I SET
DOWN CLEARLY AND UNEQUIVOCALLY THE BROAD LINES WE WOULD FOLLOW
IN OUR RELATIONS WITH THE STATES.
THE STARTING POINT WAS SIMPLY THIS: WE BELIEVE THAT
THE TOTAL AMOUNTS OF ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN THE PAST
HAVE, IN TERMS OF THE TASKS LAID UPON THEM, BEEN INADEQUATE. THE
RESULT HAS BEEN AN ACCUMULATION OF SERIOUS DEFICIENCIES ACROSS A
WIDE RANGE OF FUNCTIONS OF CRUCIAL IMPORTANCE IN THE WELL-BEING OF
OUR COMMUNITY: OVERCROWDED AND INSUFFICIENTLY STAFFED SCHOOLS,
AN INEQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH SERVICES, HOPELESSLY
INADEQUATE AND UNCO-ORDINATED SYSTEMS OF URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT,
A HUGE BACKLOG OF UNSEWERED HOUSING, AN OVERCROWDING OF
POPULATION IN OUR MAIN CITIES, AND SO ON. / 2 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN A LARGE NUMBER
OF IMPORTANT INITIATIVES DESIGNED TO TACKLE THESE DEFICIENCIES'.
BROADLY, IT HAS MOVED ON TWO FRONTS. FIRST, IT HAS ESTABLISHED
NEW INSTITUTIONS AND NEW MECHANISMS FOR ASSESSING, ON A NATIONAL
BASIS BUT IN FULL CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIES, NEEDS AND PRIORITIES IN EACH OF THE MAIN AREAS OF
CONCERN* THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION, THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND THE EXPANDED GRANTS COMMISSION ARE SOME OF THE
MAIN EXAMPLES OF MANY THAT COULD BE CITED.
SECONDLY, THE GOVERNMENT HAS, ON THE BASIS OF THESE
EXPERT ASSESSMENTS, BEGUN TO PROVIDE LARGE AMOUNTS OF FUNDS TO
THE STATES. IN RESPECT OF TWO AREAS TERTIARY EDUCATION AND
PUBLIC HOUSING WE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND
MADE APPROPRIATE ADJUSTMENTS TO THE LEVELS OF GENERAL PURPOSE
FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE STATES. IN OTHER AREAS, WE
UNDERTOOK NEW OR EXPANDED PROGRAMS OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE
ASSISTANCE DESIGNED TO ADD TO EXISTING STATE PROVISIONS IN THE
AREAS CONCERNED AND SO TO ACCELERATE IMPROVEMENTS IN STANDARDS.
THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR A BETTER AND FULLER LIFE WHICH
THESE PROGRAMS PROMISE ARE BECOMING INCREASINGLY EVIDENT AS TIME
GOES BY. WE WILL GO ON WITH THEM. THERE IS, HOWEVER, A NEED
FOR ALL OF US NOT TO TRY TO PUSH AHEAD SO FAST THAT THE ECONOMY
IS UNABLE TO MEET OUR DEMANDS.
I SAY THAT BECAUSE THE ECONOMY IS CURRENTLY
THREATENED BY A SERIOUS INFLATION. THAT INFLATION MUST BE
CURBED. THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO CURB I1% 9 o 93 
WE HAVE, IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS, TAKEN MAJOR STEPS
TO CHECK INFLATION. WE HAVE SET AN EXCHANGE RATE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR APPROPRIATE TO OUR CIRCUMSTANCES'. WE PUT A
STOP TO THE EXCESSIVE INFLOW OF MONEY FROM OVERSEAS'. WE CUT
TARIFFS SHARPLY ACROSS-THE-BOARD, WE INCREASED TAXES BY OVER
$ 600 MILLION, ON A FULL-YEAR BASIS, IN OUR FIRST BUDGET.
THROUGH THESE AN]) OTHER MEANS WE STEADILY DRAINED OFF THE
EXCESSIVE LIQUIDITY PRESENT IN THE ECONOMY WHEN WE FIRST TOOK
OFFICE. IN DOING SO, WE HAD TO ACCEPT MUCH HIGHER INTEREST
RATES THAN MY PARTY FINDS PALATABLE. MANY OF THESE STEPS HAVE
BEEN CRITICISED BY THE VERY PEOPLE WHO COMPLAIN MOST LOUDLY ABOUT
INFLATION., I NOTICE, HOWEVER, THAT NEARLY ALL THE PROFESSIONAL
ECONOMISTS WHO HAVE COMMENTED ON OUR POLICIES HAVE SAID THEY
WERE RIGHT AND COURAGEOUS,
IN MY PRESS CONFERENCE ON 7 MAY IN SYDNEY I SAID
" WE ARE PREPARED TO STRENGTHEN ALL THE STEPS
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN AND TO TAKE ANY OTHER STEPS
WHICH OUR ECONOMIC ADVISERS BELIEVE NECESSARY TO
DEFEAT INFLATION,"
I MEANT THAT. AND I TRUST THAT NOW, IN THE LIGHT OF THE
ELECTION CAMPAIGN, IT IS COMMON GROUND THAT INFLATION MUST BE
DEFEATED'. IF THERE IS ONE THING THE CAMPAIGN HAS MADE CLEAR,
IT IS THAT*. THERE ARE NO EASY WAYS OF CURBING INFLATION. NOR CAN
IT BE CURBED BY PUSHING ALL OF THE BURDEN OF DOING SO ONTO A
PARTICULAR GROUI'. A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE PRIVATE SECTOR ADDS
AS MUCH TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES AS A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE PUBLIC
SECTOR. A DOLLAR SPENT BY A STATE GOVERNMENT. ADDS AS MUCH TO
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES AS A DOLLAR SPENT BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMEN' 1. 4 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS CURRENTLY SEEKING TO
RESTRAIN PRIVATE SECTOR SPENDING BY KEEPING MONEY TIGHT, IT
IS SEEKING TO ENCOURAGE SAVING AND) DISCOURAGE SPENDING BY
INCR~ EASING THE ATTRACTIVENESS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS. HENCE THE
RISE IN YIELDS ON GOVERNMENT SECURITIES THAT IS OCCURING IN THE
MARKET*' WE ARE FOLLOWING SUCH A MONETARY POLICY, NOT BECAUSE
WE LIKE ITS CONSEQUENCES IN TERMS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY AN)
HIGHER INTEREST RATES, BUT BECAUSE WE HAVE TO IF THERE IS TO BE
A CURB ON EXCESSIVE PRIVATE SPENDIN'
THIS MEETING, OF COURSE, IS CONCERNED WITH GOVERNMENT
SPENDING., THAT TOO MUST PLAY ITS PART IN ANY POLICY OF RESTRAINT.
IT GOES AGAINST THE GRAIN FOR ME TO SAY THAT BUT ALL
OF US HERE MUST ACCEPT THE REALITIES. INFLATION MUST BE CHECKED,.
AND IT MUST BE CHECKED DECISIVELY*
I KNOW I AM PREACHING TO THE CONVERTED BUT LET ME SAY
A LITTLE ABOUT THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AND OUTLOOK.
THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX ROSE BY 13#. 6 PER CENT IN THE
YEAR TO THE MARCH QUARTER. ITS RATE OF INCREASE WAS REDUCED IN
THE MARCH QUARTER BUT THE FUTURE FOR PRICES REMAINS OMINOUS
PRICES ARE BEING PUSHED ALONG BY A COMBINATION OF
EXCESSIVE DEMAND AND EXCESSIVE COST INCREASE, INCREASINGLYj
PEOPLE ARE ADJUSTING THEIR SPENDING BEHAVIOUR TO INFLATION,
MAKING THE PROBLEM SELF-PERPETUATING.
OVER THE PAST YEAR TOTAL SPENDING, IN REAL TERMS, ROSE
BY 10 PER CENT. MUCH OF THAT INCREASE WAS SATISFIEDv NOT FROM
OUR OWN PRODUCTION, BUT BY A VERY LARGE RISE IN IMPORTS', WE
WANTED THAT TO HAPPEN, AND IT HAS'. EVEN SO, DEMAND HAS
OUTSTRIPPED SUPPLIES SHORTAGES OF BASIC MATERIALS AND EVEN OF
SOME CONSUMER GOODS ARE WIDESPREAD. INDUSTRY IS OPERATING AT
FULL CAPACITY, SUBJECT ONLY TO CONSTRAINTS IMPOSED BY LABOUR AND
MATERIAL SHORTAGES AND, IN SOME CASES, INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES'* 
CREDIT AVAILABILITY RAS NOT SO FAR BEEN A MAJOR CONSTRAINT
MONETARY TIGHTNESS IS AT PRESENT CHIEFLY SERVING TO LIMIT THE
DEGREE TO WHICH PEOPLE AND FIRMS BID AGAINST ONE ANOTHER FOR
ALREADY SCARCE RESOURCES'*'
CONSUMER SPENDING IS BOOMING. PRIVATE INVESTMENT
ALSO IS MOVING UP STRONGLY* ALTHOUGH THE SUPPLY OF HOUSING
FINANCE HAS COME DOWN FROM THE EXTRAORDINARY HEIGHTS OF A
YEAR AGO, THE HOUSING INDUSTRY IS STILL VERY MUCH UND) ER STRAINt
IN THE RECENT MARCH QUARTER, FOR EXAMPLE, THE INDUSTRY COMMENCED
MORE DWELLINGS, IN SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TERMS, THAN IT HAS EVER
BEEN ABLE TO COMPLETE IN A QUARTER. s AT THE END OF MARCH,
THERE WERE 100,000 DWELLINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTIOM' SOME 30 PER CENT
MORE THAN A YEAR EARLIER. IT IS THESE PRESSURES THAT HAVE
CAUSED HOUSE PRICES TO RISE SO EXORBITANTLY AND PREVENTED
MONEYS APPROPRIATED FOR WELFARE HOUSING FROM BEING PUT TO
EFFECTIVE USE*' ALTHOUGH, IN-THE YEAR TO THE. MARCH QUARTER,'
MORE DWELLINGS IN TOTAL WERE COMPLETED THAN IN ANY PREVIOUS
COMPARABLE PERIOD, THERE WERE FEWER COMPLETED IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR THAN IN ANY OF THE PAST 15 YEARS'.
THE PUBLIC SECTOR TOO IS TRYING TO INCREASE ITS
SPENDING FASTER THAN THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES WILL PERMIV.
TIS IS ESPECIALLY TRUE OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURES, WHERE SUPPLY
CONSTRAINTS ARE PREVENTING BUDGETED FUNDS FROM BEING SPENT AND
TENDER PRICES WHERE TENDERS CAN BE OBTAINED ARE BEING DRIVEN
UP EVEN MORE THAN COST MOVEMENTS WOULD NECESSITATE. o
OUR POLICIES WILL BE DIRECTED TO BRINGING DEMAND BACK
TO AN APPROPRIATE LEVEL, WITHOUT THAT THERE CAN BE NO HOPE OF
CHECKING THE ACCELERATING TREND IN MONEY INCOMES, INFLATIONARY
EXPECTATIONS, SPURRED ON BY THE RAPID CLIMB IN PRICES, ARE
LEADING TO PRESSURE FOR VERY LARGE WAGE INCREASES AND TO0
EMPLOYERS PAYING THEM IN THE EXPECTATION THAT INFLATION WILL 
CONTINUE AND THAT THEY CAN THEREFORE BE PASSED ON AGAIN IN PRICES.
WE ALL OF US MUST BREAK THOSE INFLATIONARY EXPECTATIONSO;
WE MUST SHOW THAT THOSE WHO BANK ON DOUBLE-FIGURE INFLATION
CONTINUING WILL BE PROVED WRONG AND SEE THAT THEY FIND THE
LESSON AN EXPENSIVE ONE. IT HAS FOR SOME TIME BEEN EASY TO
BORROW MONEY, INVEST IN REAL ASSETS SUCH AS PROPERTY, AND
EMERGE WITH A HANDSOME PROFIT ARISING NOT FROM PRODUCTIVE
EFFORT BUT FROM INFLATION". WHEN, AS WE WILL, WE HEAR OF
SOME SUCH VENTURES GOING BADLY WRONG IN THE PERIOD AHEAD,
WE WILL KNOW THAT THE RISK ELEMENT HAS BEEN RE-INTRODUCED
INTO SUCH FORMS OF INVESTMENT.
OF COURSE, THE GOVERNMENT'S PRESENT POLICIES WILL
STEADILY BRING DEMAND BACK INTO LINE. THEY WILL GRADUALLY
SLOW THE INCREASE IN PRIVATE SPENDING AS TIME GOES BY.
BUT THAT WILL NOT BREAK THE PRESENT SPIRAL. AVERAGE
EARNINGS SEEM TO HAVE RISEN 16-17 PER CENT IN 1973-74 AND
IF PRESENT TRENDS WERE TO CONTINUE THEY WOULD BE LIKELY TO
RISE BY MORE THAN 20 PER CENT IN 1974-75. MOREOVER, WITH
PRICES RISING AT THE RATE THEY ARE, DEMANDS FOR NEW WAGE
INCREASES ARE BEING MADE LITERALLY WITHIN MONTHS OF THE LAST
DEMANY. THE SPIRAL MUST BE BROKEN'. THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION
TRIBUNAL, WHICH WE PROPOSE TO STRENGTHEN, CAN ONLY DO SO MUCHf.
IF THE SITUATION IS ALLOWED TO DRIFT, WE ARE LIKELY
TO END WITH THE WORST OF ALL WORLDS OUTPUT WILL SLOW, BUT
COST AND PRICE LEVELS WILL GO ON RISING, THE GROWTH OF
IMPORTS WILL EXERT A DAMPENING INFLUENCE: BUT THAT FACTOR
CANNOT BE CALLED UPON FOR EVEW.
I HAVE ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS ADVOCATED A REFERENCE OF
POWER OVER PRICES FROM THE STATES TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
SOME OF YOU, I REALISE, HAVE EXPRESSED DOUBTS OR MISGIVINGS ABOUT
THE IMPLICATIONS OF ANY TEMPORARY REFERENCE OF SUCH A POWER'.
o../ 7 
I DO FEEL, HOW EVE R, THAT THERE ARE ASPECTS OF THIS POWER
CURRENTLY VESTED IN THE STATES W9HICH ARE NOT BEING
EFFECTIVELY USED IN MOST STATES IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
INFLATION. THE MOST OBVIOUS EXAMPLE IS THE RAPID
ESCALATION OF LAND PRICES WHICH IN 1973 WERE OF THE ORDER
OF 30 PER CENT AND 40 PER CENT IN THE MAJOR STATE CAPITALS**
OUR CONCLUSION THEREFORE IS THAT VIGOROUS AND
DECISIVE ACTION IS NEEDED NOW AND IN THE MONTHS AHEAD,
INCLUDING IN THE BUDGET, TO TURN BACK INFLATION.
IN THIS, EVERYONE WILL HAVE TO PLAY A PART,
THAT INCLUDES GOVERNME~ NTS.* THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
DO WHAT IT HAS TO DO, BOTH IN THE AREAS OF SPENDING AND
COST-PUSH INFLATION. I MENTION HERE IN RELATION TO THE
LATTER THAT I HAVE ALREADY SET UP AN INTERDEPARTMENTAL
COMMITTEE, UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF MY OWN DEPARTMENT,
AND INCLUDING THE DEPARTMENTS OF THE TREASURY AND LABOUR,
TO PREPARE A REPORT FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF MINISTERS ON
THE VERY IMPORTANT CONFERENCE CALLED BY MR JUSTICE MOORE
TO CONSIDER METHODS OF WAGE FIXATION,
TODAY, HOWEYVER, WE ARE CONSIDERING ISSUES
RELATING TO GOVERNM4ENT SPENDING. AS I HAVE SAID,
GOVERNMENT SPENDING IS NOT MORE INFLATIONARY THAN PRIVATE
SPENDING, AS SOME OF OUR WILDER CRITICS SEEM TO ALLEGE.
BUT NEITHER IS IT LESS INFLATIONARY, IN ORDER TO HELP
BREAK INFLATIONARY EXPECTATIONS, WE MUST NOW SLOW THE RATE
OF INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING. SOME PHASING DOWN
OR DEFERMENT OF SOME EXPENDITURE PLANS MUST OCCUR.' / 8 
AS REGARDS EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS WHICH ARE WHOLLY OUR
OWN RESPONSIBILITY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE LOOKING CLOSELY AT
ALL SUCH PROGRAMS AS IT PROCEEDS WITH PREPARATION FOR ITS
1974-75 BUDGET. WE ARE ANXIOUS TO SEE THAT THERE IS CONTINUED
SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS WITH THlE PROGRAMS WE HAVE BEEN IMPLEMENTING,
ESPECIALLY IN SUCH VITALLY IMPORTANT FIELDS AS EDUCATION AND
lEALTW.* AT THE SAME TIME, WE RECOGNISE THAT IT WILL NOT BE
FEASIBLE, IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES,-T0 ACHIEVE IN THE COMING
FINANCIAL YEAR THE RATES OF PROGRESS WITH ALL THESE PROGRAMS TO
WHICH EARLIER PLANNING AND EXPECTATIONS HAVE BEEN PITCHED.
WITH A NUMBER OF THM, WE WILL HAVE TO ACCEPT A SLOWER RATE OF
IMPLEMENTATION THAN WE HAD BEEN HOPING FOR. AS PART OF THE
BATTLE TO CONTAIN INFLATION WE WILL BE FOLLOWING A POLICY OF
RESTRAINT IN OUR OWN SPENDING. WE WILL ALSO BE LOOKING TO
THOSE OF OUR BUSINESS ENTERPRISES WHICH ARE NOT PAYING THEIR OWN
WAY TH1AT IS, WHOSE LOSSES ARE BEING IMPOSED ON THE TAXPAYER
TO LIFT THEIR CHARGES'. USERS MUST PAY MORE OF THE COSTS INVOLVEDM
FOR THE MOST PART, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
DECISIONS REGARDING EXENDITURE IN THE COMING YEAR ON PROGRAMS'
WHICH ARE WHOLLY ITS RESPONSIBILITY MUST NECESSARILY AWAIT THE
1974-75 BUDGET. BUT I ANNOUNCE NOW CERTAIN DECISIONS WHICH
ILLUSTRATE, BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, WHAT OUR APPROACH WILL BE.
THE POST OFFICE WE INTEND TO KEEP THE BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE POST
OFFICE IN 1974/ 75 TO NOT MORE THAN THE ACTUAL AMOUNT ALLOCATED
IN 1973/ 74. THIS WILL MEAN TWO THINGS'. FIRST, THE POST
OFFICE'S CAPITAL PROGRAM WILL HAVE TO BE REDUCED BELOW THE LEVEL
THAT'HAD BEEN INDICATED BY THE POST OFFICE'S FORWARD PLANNING' 
SECOND, EVEN TO FINANCE SUCH A REDUCED PROGRAM IT WILL BE
NECESSARY FOR THE POST OFFICE TO RAISE SUBSTANTIAL
ADDITIONAL REVENUE BY WAY OF INCREASED CHARGES. THE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE IS AT PRESENT OPERATING AT VERY
MARGINAL RATES OF PROFITABILITY, AND THE POSTAL SERVICE IS
PRESENTLY RUNNING AT A LOSS WHICH WOULD BE OVER $ 70 MILLION
IN 1974/ 75. POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CHARGES WILL
HAVE TO BE INCREASED SO THAT AS A GENERAL RULE THE PRICES
PAID BY USERS OF THE SERVICES WILL MORE TRULY REFLECT
COMMERCIAL COSTS. ONE EFFECT OF THIS WILL BE TO REDUCE
DEMAND FOR NEW TELEPHONE SERVICES, WHICH IS AT PRESENT
INFLATED BY THE LOW PRICES BEING CHARGED RELATIVE TO THE
COST OF PROVIDING THE SERVICES'.
TO ILLUSTRATE THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WHAT I HAVE
SAID, I POINT OUT THAT ADVANCES TO THE POST OFFICE REPRESENT
THE LARGES~ T SINGLE ITEM OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
ON ECONOMIC SERVICES. ADVANCES TO THE POST OFFICE IN 1973/ 74
WILL AMOUNT TO $ 385 MILLION OUT OF A TOTAL EXPENDITURE ON ALL
FORMS OF TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS OF ABOUT $ 860 MILLION.
AS I HAVE-INDICATED, IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR THE
POST OFFICE TO RAISE SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONAL REVENUE BY WAY OF
INCREASEr CHARGES. THIS IS ENTIRELY CONSISTENT WITH ONE OF
THE FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE AUSTRALIAN
POST OFFICE ( THE VERNON COMMISSION) NAMELY, THAT AN
OBJECTIVE IN SETTING CHARGES FOR POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES SHOULD BE TO RECOUP FROM USERS THE COST OF THE
SERVICES AND ALSO TO PROVIDE, TOGETHER WITH OTHER FUNDS
GENERATED INTERNALLY SUCH AS DEPRECIATION AND PROVISIONS,
AMOUNTS EQUAL TO 50 PERCENT OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IN EACH
YEARO 00/ 10 
1O.
CAPITAL WORKS AND OTHER CAPITrAL EXPENDITURE:
WE INTEND TO APPLY MOST STRINGENT RESTRAINTS ON
CAPITAL WORKS AND OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURE IN 1974-75 BY
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AUTHORITIES. THE
APPLICATION OF THESE RESTRAINTS WILL EXTEND TO PROJECTS IN
THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY,
WITH DUE RECOGNITION TO THE GOVERNMENT'S PRIORITIES IN THE
HEALTH AND EDUCATION AREAS. TILE FIELD Is A COMPLEX ONE AND WE
SHALL HAVE TO SORT OUT OUR PRIORITIES IN THE TIME AHEAD. AS
ONE SPECIFIC EXAMPLE, HOWEVER, I MENTION THAT IN THE CASE OF
CIVIL AVIATION CAPITAL WORKS WE SHALL IN 1974-75 HOLD ACTUAL
EXPENDITURE TO. NOT MORE THAN THE LEVEL OF EXPENDITURE. IN
1973-74. TO THAT END WE WILL BE TAKING ACTION TO SLOW DOWN
THE RATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF NEW AIRPORT WORKS. IN ADDITION, THE
CAPITAL WORKS PROGRAMS FOR CIVIL AVIATION IN THE YEAR 1974-75
WILL BE FRAMED ON THE BASIS OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISION TO
BE RECOVERING BY THE END OF FIVE YEARS 80 PER CENT OF THE
COST OF AIRPORT AND AIRWAY FACILITIES FROM THE USERS OF THOSE
FACILITIES. ACHIEVING THIS POLICY OBJECTIVE IS INVOLVING
MEETINGS WITH ALL SECTORS OF THE-AVIATION INDUSTRY, THE
MOST RECENT OF WHICH WAS HELD LAST WEEK. I ALSO ANNOUNCE
THAT WE SHALL LIMIT EXPENDITURE IN 1974-75 ON THE OPERATION
OF AIRPORT AND AIRWAY FACILITIES TO THE SAME REAL LEVEL AS
IN 1973-74. 
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICES SUBSIDY SCHEME:
THIS SCHEME AT PRESENT OPERATES TO KEEP THE
WHOLESALE PRICES OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS IN AREAS OUTSIDE
THE CAPITAL CITIES TO WITHIN 5 CENTS PER GALLON OF CAPITAL
CITY PRICES. THE SCHEME WOULD COST ABOUT $ 28 MILLION IN
1974-75. THE COOMBS TASK FORCE SUGGESTED THAT THE SUBSIDY
BE ABOLISHED, AND WE WOULD CERTAINLY HAVE BEEN ADOPTING THAT
SUGGESTION IN THE COMING BUDGET. WE SHALL IN FACT NOW ADOPT
IT WITHOUT FURTHER DELAY, WITH EFFECT FROM 1 AUGUST 1974.
AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE:
IN 1974-75 WE INTEND TO APPLY A CEILING INCREASE
OF 2.6 PER CENT ON THE GROWTH OF FULL-TIME STAFF EMPLOYED
UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT. AFTER ALLOWANCE FOR AN
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF STAFF EXPECTED TO BE ON VARIOUS
FORMS OF LEAVE, THE CEILING INCREASE IN 1974-75 ON TOTAL
OPERATIVE STAFF EMPLOYED UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT
WILL BE 1 PER CENT.
THESE STAFF CEILINGS DO NOT OF COURSE TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT ANY TRANSFER OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES INTO OR OUT
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE.
THE FIGURE OF 2.6 PER CENT COMPARES WITH AN
AVERAGE COMPOUND GROWTH RATE FOR THE PERIOD JUNE 1962 TO
JUNE 1972 -THE LAST TEN YEARS OF LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY
GOVERNMENT -FOR FULL-TIME STAFF EMPLOYED UNDER THE PUBLIC
SERVICE ACT OF 3.87 PER CENT. / 12 
12.
THE STRINGENT RESTRAINT ON THE GROWTH OF STAFF
NUMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE WILL BE REFLECTED
NOT ONLY IN SALARY COSTS, BUT ALSO IN NON-SALARY DEPARTMENTAL
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
A SIMILAR LEVEL OF RESTRAINT WILL BE APPLIED TO
STAFF NUMBERS EMPLOYED BY AUTHORITIES THAT DO NOT COME
UNDER THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT.
DEFENCE PROGRAM: IN THE DEFENCE FIELD, FURTHER ECONOMIES WILL BE
ACHIEVED IN CIVILIAN MANPOWER. AS ANNOUNCED IN AUGUST 1973,
A MAJOR REDUCTION IN CIVILIAN MANPOWER IS BEING MADE IN THE
DEPARTMENTS OF DEFENCE AND SUPPLY DURING THE CURRENT YEAR
1973/ 74. THIS LARGE SAVING IS BEING ACHIEVED MAINLY By
ECONOMIES, AND THROUGH IMPROVED MANAGEMENT. IT HAS ALLOWED
RE-ALLOCATION OF AVAILABLE FUNDS TO HIGHER DEFENCE PRIORITIES
INCLUDING ESSENTIAL NEW FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENTS. PLANS
FOR THE 1974/ 75 BUDGET AS PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED IN DECEMBER
1973 ENVISAGE A FURTH-ER REDUCTION IN CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT IN
THE DEFENCE DEPARTMENT OF ABOUT 1500, EVEN THOUGH
LEGISLATION TO IMPLEMENT THE DEFENCE RE-ORGANISATION HAS BEEN
DELAYED BY THE PROROGUING OF PARL. IAMENT.
IN THE MUNITIONS FACTORIES, THE REDUCED SCALE OF
PRODUCTION NOW NECESSARY FOR DEFENCE PURPOSES WILL ALLOW THE
RELEASE TO TI'E CIVILIAN WORKFORCE OF A SUBSTANTIAL NUMBER OF
WORKERS INCLUDING MANY WITH SKILLS SCARCE IN THE PRESENT TIGHT
EMPLOYMENT SITUATION. THIS SURPLUS OF LABOUR OVER THAT ./ 13 
13.
ESSENTIAL TO PROVIDE THE SERVICES' REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNITIONS
IS NOT A NEW SITUATION BUT IS ONE WHICH SHOULD HAVE BEEN FACED
LONG AGO BY THE PREVIOUS COALITION GOVERNMENT. A SIMILAR BUT
MUCH LESS SEVERE SITUATION APPLIES IN THE R D ESTABLISHMENTS
AND TlIERE MAY BE A SMALL RESIDUAL PROBLEM IN THE SHORT TERM
AT WILLIAMSTOWN NAVAL DOCKYARD.
ANY REDUCTIONS IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT
WILL BE MADE AS FAR AS PRACTICAL BY NOT REPLACING THE NORMAL
WASTAGE OF PERSONNEL. RETRENCHMENTS WILL, HOWEVER, BECOME
NECESSARY IN CERTAIN AREAS FOR ONE THING TO KEEP THE RIGHT
SORT OF BALANCE IN EMPLOYMENT. WHERE DISMISSALS BECOME
NECESSARY THE GOVERNMENT WILL ENSURE THAT STEPS ARE TAKEN
TO HELP THE INDIVIDUAL CONCERNED TO MOVE INTO OTH-ER
EMPLOYMENT, INCLUDING SOME FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND
RETRAINING WHERE NECESSARY. I MIGHT ADD THAT THE GOVERNMENT
NOW HAS, FOR CONSIDERATION, A REPORT OF AN INTERDEPARTMENTAL
COMMITTEE, SETTING OUT GUIDELINES FOR ASSISTANCE FOR AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WHO BECOME REDUNDANT AN]) WOULD MAKE ITS
DECISION ON THE PROVISIONS OF THIS REPORT BEFORE DISMISSALS
TPKE PLACE. A REVIEW OF THE ARMY'S REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHT
OBSERVATION HELICOPTERS HAS BEEN COMPLETED AND THE PRODUCTION
PROGRAM WILL BE REDUCED FROM 75 TO 56 MILITARY AIRCRAFT.
AS A CONSEQUENCE PROPOSED ASSOCIATED PRODUCTION OF 116
HELICOPTERS WILL NOT NOW BE UNDERTAKEN. THE OVERALL SAVING
IN THE PROJECT WILL BE ABOUT $ 12 MILLION OVER THE NEXT FIVE / 14 
14.
YEARS. CONSEQUENTIAL EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT AT COMMONWEALTH
AIRCRAFT CORPORATION WILL BE EXAMINED IN THE CONTEXT OF AN
OVERALL RATIONALISATION OF THE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY.
I EMP111ASISE THAT THE FOREGOING ARE ONLY EXAMPLES
AND DO NOT CONSTITUTE A COMPREHIENSIVE LIST OF DECISIONS.
THAT MUST AWAIT THE PREPARATION OF THE 1974/ 75 BUDGET.
BUT TI-E EXAMPLES I HAVE GIVEN ARE, I BELIEVE, SUFFICIENT TO
DEMONSTRATE THE STRINGENCY OF THE APPROACH THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL BE TAKING AT THAT TIME.
AS REGARDS EXENDITUJRE PROPOSALS INVOLVING NEW
OR ADDITIONAL SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TO THE STATES, WE WILL ALSO NEED TO APPLY STRICT
TESTS, BOTH AS TO HOW THE PROPOSALS MEASURE UP IN TERMS OF
NATIONAL INTERESTS AND AS TO TIMING, BEFORE WE CAN
CONTEMPLATE COMMITTING OURSELVES TO THEM.
I CAN, HOXEVrP., AT THIS POINT INDICATE OUR
PROPOSALS WITH RESPECT TO ROADS AND WELFARE HOUSING.
NO DOUBT YOU HAVE ALL SEEN THE BUREAU OF ROADS'
RECENT REPORT ON " ROADS IN AUSTRALIA". THIS RECOMMENDS
THlE PROVISION OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERMIENT ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS
OVER THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
WE HAVE DECIDED HOWEVER TO RESTRICT THE PERIOD
OF THE NEXT ROAD ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION TO THREE ' YEARS.
OVER THE NEXT 18 MONTHS WE SHALL BE WORKING TO RATIONALISE
OUR SEPARATE ROAD AND URBAN TRANSPORT ASSISTANCE INTO A
CLOSELY CO-ORDINATED) AND INTEGRATED SET OF ARRANGEMENTS. 
AN IMPORTANT STEP IN THIS REGARD IS THE ACTION WE HAVE
ALREADY TAKEN TO COMBINE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S MAJOR
TRANSPORT RESPONSIBILITIES UNDER ONE MINISTER AND WITHIN ONE
DEPARTMENT. THIS WILL FACILITATE EFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF
RESOURCES, BOTH BETWEEN THE VARIOUS TRANSPORT MODES AND
BETWEEN TRANSPORT AND OTHER AREAS OF INVESTMENT, AND WE
CAN NOW PROCEED MORE CERTAINLY TOWARDS THAT OBJECTIVE. MY
GOVERNMENT HOPES TO LEGISLATE BY THE END OF 1975 FOR A NEW
APPROACH TO TRANSPORT ASSISTANCE FOR THE STATES TO COMMENCE
IN JULY 1977. A PRINCIPAL AIM IN OUR INTENTION TO
LEGISLATE FOR THE 1977 TO 1980 PERIOD 18 MONTHS BEFORE ITS
COMMENCEMENT IS TO ASSIST YOU WITH YOUR FORWARD PLANNING.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE NEW ROADS ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION
WILL BE INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST SESSION OF THE NEW PARLIAMENT
AND WILL APPROPRIATE A TOTAL OF $ 1,120 MILLION AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS FOR ROADS
IN THE STATES. THIS IS LESS THAN THE AMOUNT OF $ 1,345 MILLION
THE BUREAU OF ROADS RECOMMENDED FOR THIS PERIOD; BUT THE
BUREAU'S REPORT MUST BE LOOKED AT IN A TOTAL ECONOMIC
CONTEXT AND IN THE LIGHT OF ALL OUR PRIORITIES RATHER THAN
IN TERMS OF ROADS OR TRANSPORT IN ISOLATION. THE $ 1,120
MILLION WILL BE MADE UP OF $ 348 MILLION FOR 1974-75,
$ 367 MILLION FOR 1975-76 AND $ 405 MILLION FOR 1976-77.
IN MY ELECTION POLICY SPEECH I ANNOUNCED THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PRESS AHEAD WITH THE
CONSTRUCTION OF A NATIONAL ROADS SYSTEM IN THOSE AREAS WHICH / 16 
FALL WITHIN ITS OWN CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND
THAT, IN PARTICULAR, IT WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE WHOLE COST OF CONSTRUCTING AND MAINTAINING THE
PRINCIPAL ROAD BETWEEN STATE CAPITALS AND OF EXPORT ROADS
TO AIRPORTS AND SEAPORTS. OUT OF THE TOTAL OF S1,120
MILLION PREVIOUSLY MENTIONED, WE WILL ALLOCATE A SUM OF
1400 MILLION OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS TO EMBARK ON THIS
MAJOR NEW INITIATIVE.
FULL DETAILS OF THE PROPOSED NEW PROGRAM OF
ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS WILL BE CONVEYED TO YOU SHORTLY.
IN DETERMINING THE OVERALL AMOUNT THAT WE-WOULD
BE ABLE TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR ROADS WE HAVE, AS I INDICATED,
HAD TO TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION OTHER TRANSPORT PROGRAMS,
PARTICULARLY IN THE URBAN AREAS. WE SEE IMPROVED PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AS ESSENTIAL FOR IMPROVEMENT OF THE LOT OF OUR
CITY DWELLERS, AND WE PROPOSE TO PRESS ON WITH THE URBAN
PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAMS WE HAVE INITIATED. THE
TREASURER STATED IN HIS BUDlGET SPEECH LAST YEAR THAT IT
COULD BE EXPECTED THAT OUR OUTLAYS IN THIS FIELD WILL
INCREASE RAPIDLY IN 1974-75 AND BEYOND AS THIS MAJOR NEW
CAPITAL WORKS PROGRAM GETS UNDER WAY. THAT PROSPECT STILL
HOLDS. WE ALSO SEE THlE RAILWAYS AS HAVING A VITAL ROLE IN
OUR ECONOMY, BUT THEY MUST BE MODERNISED AND MADE MORE
EFFICIENT. SO WE ALSO INTEND TO PRESS AHEAD WITH OUR
RAILWAY PROGRAMS. IN THIS REGARD, I RECALL THAT ONLY
RECENTLY I SIGNED AGREEMENTS WITH THE PREMIER OF SOUTH @ 17
16. 
17.
AUSTRALIA FOR THE NEW STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY LINE TO ALICE
SPRINGS AND ADELAIDE.
THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO ENSURE THAT LESS
PRIVILEGED FAMILIES IN OUR SOCIETY ARE NOT DENIED THE CHLANCE
TO LIVE IN ADEQUATE HOMES, AN) THAT MANY MORE LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES ARE GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO BUY HOMES OF THEIR
OWN. OUR PRESENT POLICIES ARE DIRECTED TO BRINGING ABOUT A
MORE BALANCED SITUATION IN THE HOUSING INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE.
THEY ARE DESIGNED BOTH TO EASE THE PRESSURE ON RESOURCES
AND THE CONSEQUENTIAL BIDDING UP OF COSTS AND PRICES IN
THE INDUSTRY AND TO MAKE ROOM FOR A MORE REASONABLE LEVEL
OF DWELLING CONSTRUCTION BY THE PUBLIC SECTOR. NOT ALL
THE STATES WERE ABLE, IN 1973-74, TO EFFECTIVELY USE THE
$ 218.5 MILLION ADVANCED TO THEM UNDER THE 1973 HOUSING
AGREEMENT. AS A RESULT, SOME MONEYS PROVIDED UNDER THE
AGREEMENT WERE NOT USED AT ALL AND WILL THEREFORE REMAIN
AVAILABLE F~ OR USE IN 1974-75.
SOME FUNDS WERE ALSO USED, IN 1973-74, AS IN
PREVIOUS YEARS, TO PURCHASE LAND FOR FUTURE USE BY STATE
HOUSING AUTHORITIES. IN THE YEAR AHEAD, HOWEVER, WE THINK
THAT ADVANTAGE SHOULD BE TAKEN OF THE EASIER CONDITIONS
LIKELY TO DEVELOP TO SWITCH THE BALANCE OF ACTIVITY FROM
LAND PURCHASE TOWARDS INCREASED BUILDING. AS PART OF THE
BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION MY GOVERNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE AND
IS OFFERING FUNDS TO YOU TO SET UP LAND COMMISSIONS TO
REDUCE LAND PRICES BY MAKING LAND AVAILABLE AT COST. WHILE 
18.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED THAT MONEY FOR WELFARE HOUSING SHOULD BE
MADE AVAILABLE THROUGH THE HOUSING AGREEMENT AT AN INTEREST
RATE OF ONLY 4 PER CENT, IT WOULD NOT BE APPROPRIATE FOR
THIS MONEY TO BE USED FOR THE PURCHASE AND DEVELOPM4ENT
OF LARGE ESTATES FOR SALE TO PEOPLE WHO WOULD NOT
QUALIFY UNDER THE MEANS TEST FOR WELFARE HOUSING. WE
LOOK FORWARD IN THE FUTURE TO THE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITIES
OBTAINING MOST, IF NOT ALL, OF THEIR LAND REQUIREMENTS
THROUGH THE LAND COMMISSIONS.
IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES WE ARE PROPOSING TO MAKE
ADVANCES OF $ 235 MILLION UNDER THE AGREEMENT IN 1974-75
IN ADDITION TO THE AMOUNT CARRIED FORWARD FROM 1973-74.
THIS WILL, IN FACT, MEAN A SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE IN THE
FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THE STATES FOR EXPENDITURE ON WELFARE
HOUSING. HOWEVER, IN VIEW OF THE LIMITATIONS WHICH THE
HOUSING AGREEMENT PROVIDES IN RESPECT OF THE FUNDS FOR
THE HOME BUILDERS ACCOUNT, IT IS PROPOSED TO DISCUSS WITH
TPE STATES AN AMENDMENT TO THE AGREEMENT WHICH WOULD
PERMIT A HIGHER PROPORTION OF AVAILABLE FUNDS TO BE
ALLOCATED TO THE HOME BUILDERS ACCOUNT WHEN CIRCUMSTANCES
WARRANT. WE THUS LOOK FORWARD IN 1974-75 TO THE COMPLETION
OF CONSIDERABLY MORE DWELLINGS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR THAN IN
1973-74. BUT I SHOULD ALSO SAY THAT, IN THE LIGHT OF
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE AS THE YEAR UNFOLDS,
INCLUDING THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES FOR HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
AND THE ABILITY OF THE STATES TO PUT FURTHER FUNDS TO PRODUCTIVE
USE IN WELFARE HOUSING, WE STAND READY TO CONSULT FURTHER
WITH THE STATES ON THE PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL ADVANCES. / 19 
19.
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS MUST ALSO PLAY THEIR PARTS
IN BEATING INFLATION. MANY OF THE PREMIERS UNDERTOOK,
DURING THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN, TO CO-OPERATE WITH AN L-CP
GOVERNMENT, HAD THAT BEEN RETURNED, IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
INFLATION. THE FIGHT IS ON AND I HOPE THAT THE FULL
CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE STATE GOVERNN4ENTS
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE CONTROL OF LAND PRICES WILL BE
FORTHCOMING. IN 1973-74 TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES GREW
RAPIDLY. TAKING ALL FORMS OF PAYMENTS TO THE STATES
TOGETHER WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENTS' LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS,
THE INCREASE IS ESTIMATED AT OVER 20 PER CENT. EVEN
ALLOWING FOR THE EFFECTS OF INCREASES IN COSTS, THIS
REPRESENTS A VERY SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE.
THE CRUCIAL QUESTION, OF COURSE, IS THIS:
TO WHAT EXTENT HAVE THESE LARGE INCREASES IN FUNDS BEEN
TRANSLATED INTO REAL IMPROVEMENTS IN THE STANDARDS OF
STATE-PROVIDED SERVICES AND FACILITIES? IT SEEMS THAT,
PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELDS OF HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION,
RESOURCES HAVE BEEN OVERSTRETCHED AND INFLATION HAS EATEN
HEAVILY INTO THE MONEY SUMS AVAILABLE. BECAUSE OF
SHORTAGES OF'LABOUR AND MATERIALS IN THESE AREAS, THE STATES
AND THEIR AUTHORITIES HAVE IN SOME CASES BEEN UNABLE TO USE
ALL THE FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THEM.
THE PRESENT REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS WERE 
ORIGINALLY SETTLED IN JUNE 19) 70 AND WERE INTENDED TO APPLY
OVER THE FIVE YEARS 1970-71 TO 1974-75. MY GOVERNMENT
ACCEPTS THE OBLIGATION TO REVIEW THE ARRANGEMENTS BEFORE
THE END OF 1974-75 WITH A VIEW TO DETERMINING WHAT CHANGES
IN THEM, IF ANY, SHOULD APPLY FROM 1975-76.
IN THE LIGHT OF WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT ACTION
PROPOSED IN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS,
WE HAVE GIVEN CLOSE ATTENTION TO WHAT WE CONSIDER IS BOTH
APPROPRIATE AN]) FEASIBLE BY WAY OF ADDITIONAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE, AND SUPPORT FOR BORROWING PROGRAMS, FOR STATE
GOVERNMENTS. ON THE REVENUE SIDE, I SHOULD FIRST EXPRESS
OUR APPRECIATION OF THE MATERIAL YOU HAVE ALL PROVIDED ON
YOUR FINANCIAL POSITIONS THIS YEAR, AND YOUR PROSPECTIVE
BUDGETARY POSITIONS IN 1974-75.
ALREADY, BOTH AS A RESULT OF THE OPERATION OF
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS FORMULA AND OF THE SPECIAL
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WHICH WE AGREED TO PROVIDE TO THE
STATES THIS YEAR, TOTAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS IN
1973-74 ARE ESTIMATED TO SHOW AN INCREASE ON 1972-73 OF
$ 208 ' MILLION. WE HAVE CONCLUDED THAT THERE IS NO CASE
FOR ANY ADDITIONAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE THIS YEAR. WHILE
MOST STATES APPEAR LIKELY TO INCUR BUDGET DEFICITS THIS
YEAR, THE EXTENT OF THESE APPEARS TO US TO BE MANAGEABLE
GIVEN THE OVERALL ACCUMULATED POSITIONS ON REVENUE AND
./ 21 
21.
LOAN ACCOUNTS COMBINED AS AT 30 JUNE NEXT.
FOR 1974-75, THE OUTLOOK, AS PRESENTLY REVEALED
BY THE INFORMATION PROVIDED, IS FOR SUBSTANTIAL DEFICITS IN
THE ABSENCE OF ANY NEW TAXES OR CHARGES, AND BEFORE ALLOWING
FOR WAGE INCREASES THAT CANNOT BE FORESEEN BUT WHICH WILL
OCCUR THROUGH THE YEAR. IT IS HIGHLY RELEVANT THAT A
MAJOR ELEMENT IN THE PRESENT AND PROSPECTIVE BUDGETARY
POSITIONS OF THE STATES IS TO BE FOUND IN THE LOSSES
BEING MADE BY THEIR BUSINESS UNDERTAKINGS PARTICULARLY
THEIR RAILWAYS. HOWEVER THAT MAY BE, WE ARE LOOKING TO
THE STATES TO CLOSE THOSE GAPS FROM THEIR OWN RESOURCES.
THOSE RESOURCES, OF COURSE, INCLUDE VERY
SUBSTANTIAL INCREASES IN THE GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS-PROVIDED
UNDER THE FORMULA. EVEN SO, WE REALISE THAT THE CLOSING
OF THE STATES' PROSPECTIVE REVENUE GAPS WILL NOT BE EASY.
NOR HAVE MANY OF THE DECISIONS WE HAVE HAD TO TAKE DURING
THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS BEEN EASY. DECISIONS TO
TERMINATE THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY, TO PHASE OUT THE
SUBSIDY ON THE PRODUCTION OF DAIRY PRODUCTS, TO
TERMINATE THE INVESTMENT ALLOWANCES, TO REDUCE TARIFFS, TO
REVALUE THE CURRENCY NONE OF THESE DECISIONS WAS EASY.
WE TOOK THEM BECAUSE THE PREVIOUSLY PREVAILING SITUATION
IN EACH CASE REPRESENTED A DISTORTION OF THE ECONOMY AWAY
FROM THE PUBLIC INTEREST GENERALLY AND TOWARDS A SECTIONAL
INTEREST. WE ACTED IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST; AND WE LOOK 
22.
TO THE STATE GOVERNMENTS TO DO LIKEWISE WITHIN THEIR OWN
DOMAINS. FOR EXAMPLE, A MOMENT AGO, I REFERRED TO THE
LOSSES OF STATE RAILWAYS. LET ME ADD A FEW WORDS.
UNDER OUR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAM-AND
IN OTHER WAYS, WE WILL BE ENDEAVOURING TO HELP IMPROVE
AUSTRALIA' S RAILWAYS. WE HOPE YOU WILL COMPLEMENT OUR
EFFORTS BY LOOKING CAREFULLY AT THE OPERATING PROCEDURES
AND EXPENSES OF YOUR RAILWAYS. WE WOULD BE PREPARED TO
PROVIDE FUNDS FOR SUCH INVESTIGATIONS THROUGH OUR
PROPOSED TRANSPORT RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
AT THE PRESENT TIME THE STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS
ARE INEFFICIENT, OUTDATED AND FACING ENORMOUS DEFICITS.
THIS IS WHY I OFFERED TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE THAT WAS PREPARED TO TRANSFER
THEM. THAT OFFER STILL STANDS AND WE WOULD HOPE THAT IN
THE INTERESTS OF EFFICIENT TRANSPORT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
THE GOVERNMENTS OF VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND WILL
RECONSIDER THEIR DECISIONS NOT TO DISCUSS THIS MATTER
WITH US. I HAVE SEEN RECENT NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF STATEMENTS
BY MR MORRIS, N. S. W. MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, THAT HIS
RAILWAY SYSTEM WILL HAVE A DEFICIT THIS YEAR OF
$ 126 MILLION. TO OVERCOME THIS PROBLEM HE INDICATED IT
WOULD BE NECESSARY TO ATTRACT MORE BUSINESS AND SEVERELY
RATIONALISE RAIL OPERATIONS WHICH ARE NOT SOCIALLY OR / 23 
23.
ECONOMICALLY VIA. BLE AT T~ lE SA. ME TIME MR MORRIS
PLEDGED THAT THIS WOULD NOT INVOLVE THE SACKING OR
RETRENCHMENT OF STAFF. I B3ELIEVE THIS IS A STEP IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION. RAILWAY DEFICITS OF THIS MAGNITUDE ARE
UNACCEPTABLE AT ANY TIME BUT MORE PARTICULARLY SO IN THE
PRESENT CLIMATE.
WHAT I HAVE SAID EARLIER BOILS DOWN TO SAYING THAT,
WHILE WE DO NOT INTEND TO PROVIDE ANY ASSISTANCE OVER AND
ABOVE THAT ALREADY COMMITTED, WE ARE STANDING BY OUR
PRESENT COMMITMENTS. ONE OF THESE PRESENT COMMITMENTS BY WHICH WE
STAND IS TO HELP ALLEVIATE THE EFFECTS OF NATURAL
DISASTERS. THESE CAN THROW UNEXPECTED FINANCIAL BURDENS
ON THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES. I WROTE TO THE
PREMIERS EARLIER THIS YEAR SETTING OUT OUR POLICY IN THIS
AREA. I REAFFIRM THAT POLICY. IT PROVIDES VERY REAL
PROTECTION FOR THE STATES AGAINST WHAT COULD OTHERWISE
BE INTOLERABLE FINANCIAL BURDENS FOR THEM. IN ILLUSTRATION
OF THIS, I POINT OUT THAT WE HAVE LEGISLATED FOR PAYMENT
OF UP TO $ 71.5 MILLI-ON TO QUEENSLAND AND NEW SOUTH WALES
FOR RELIEF AND RESTORATION MEASURES FOLLOWING THE FLOODS
IN THOSE STATES EARLIER THIS YEAR, AND HAVE ALREADY
PROVIDED SOME $ 20 MILLION OF THIS. THIS ASSISTANCE IS,
OF COURSE, IN ADDITION TO THE QUITE LARGE COSTS OF MAKING
AVAILABLE MEMBERS OF THE ARMED SERVICES AND THE CIVIL
DEFENCE ORGANISATION AND THEIR EQUIPMENT FOR EMERGENCY / 24 
24.
RESCUE AND RELIEF OPERATIONS.
I MENTIONED EARLIER THE ADJUSTMENTS WHICH WE
MADE TO GENERAL PURPOSE FUNDS PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN
1973-74 TO OFFSET THE COSTS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
BUDGET AND THE GAINS TO THE STATES' BUDGETS, RESULTING
FROM OUR NEW OR EXPANDED COMMITMENTS IN THE FIELDS OF
WELFARE HOUSING AND TERTIARY EDUCATION. THESE ADJUSTMENTS
WERE MADE IN PURSUANCE OF A GENERAL PRINCIPLE WHICH
MIGHT, IN SHORTHAND TERMS, BE REFERRED TO AS THE
" OFFSETS PRINCIPLE". AND WHICH I OUTLINED IN MY OPENING
SPEECH AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST YEAR. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FIRMLY COMMITTED TO THIS PRINCIPLE
AND WILL PURSUE ITS APPLICATION WHEREVER APPROPRIATE. I
HAVE INFORMED PREMIERS OF OUR INTENTION TO DO SO IN
RESPECT OF INITIATIVES WE ARE TAKING IN THE FIELDS OF
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS AND ASSISTANCE FOR DESERTED WIVES, AND
I EXPECT THAT FURTHER CASES COULD ARISE AS WE DEVELOP OUR
POLICIES IN OTHER AREAS.
IN CONSIDERING THE SIZE OF THE LOAN COUNCIL
BORROWING PROGRAMS* WE COULD SUPPORT, WE HAVE BEEN VERY
CONSCIOUS THAT MANY OF THE PROJECTS BOTH THOSE ALREADY
UNDER WAY AND NEW PROJECTS PROPOSED WHICH THE BORROWING
PROGRAMS SUBMITTED BY THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES
WOULD COVER WOULD BE VERY DESIRABLE. INDEED, PROGRESS
WITH MANY OF THEM IS A NECESSARY INGREDIENT FOR
ACHIEVEMENT OF OUR OBJECTIVES IN SUCH VITALLY IMPORTANT 
AREAS AS EDUCATION, HEALTH, URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY. WE WILL
BE PROVIDING SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASED FUNDS IN THE COMING
FINANCIAL YEAR, BY WAY OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS,
UNDER THE NEW PROGRAMS WE HAVE INITIATED IN THESE AREAS,
AND WE WILL BE AIMING TO PRESS AHEAD WITH THESE IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE STATES.
WE HAVE ALL RECOGNISED THAT CERTAIN ITEMS
NAVE AN INDISPUTABLE PRIORITY AND URGENCY. NONE OF USCAN
DOUBT THAT IT IS ONE OF OUR MOST PRESSING OBLIGATIONS
TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY OF SERVICE) LAND FOR PROSPECTIVE
HOME BUILDERS. THE PRICE OF LAND FOR RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING MUST BE REDUCED. THERE . IS NO DISPUTE THAT A
SUSTAINED COLLABORATIVE EFFORT IS REQUIRED TO ELIMINATE
THE SEWERAGE BACKLOG IN OUR MtkJOR CITIES AND TOWNS. IT
IS SURELY NOT A MATTER.-OF DE--ATE THIAT OUR INADEQUATE
PUBLIC TRANSPORT'SYSTEMS NEED IMM1EDIATE IMPROVEMENT.
ON ALL OF THESE MATTERS THE OBJECTIVES OF OUR
RESPECTIVE GOVERNMENTS ARE EVIDENTLY IN HARMONY. OUR
MUTUAL ASSESSMENT OF PRIORITIES SHOULD BE REFLECTED IN
THlE WIAY W4E SPEND THE FUNDS AVAILABLE. WHERE WE HAVE
PROVIDED ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO OVERCOME A BACKLOG SITUATION,
SUCH AS EXISTS WITH RESPECT TO SEWERAGE AND URBAN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT, THEN I AM SURE THAT YOU WILL WANT TO MAINTAIN
YOUR OWN EFFORT IN THESE FIELDS.
AGAINST TIHAT BACKGROUND, WE ARE PREPARED TO
SUPPORT SOME INCREASE IN BOTHY GOVERNMENT AND " LARGER AUTNORITY" ./ 26 
26.
BORROWINGS. IN BRIEF. OUR PROPOSAL FOR THE-BORROWING
PROGRAMS FOR STATE WORKS AND THE " LARGER" SEMI.-GOVERNMENTAL
BORROWING PROGRAMS IS THAT THE " BASIC" PROGRAMS BE INCREASED
IN 1974-75 BY 10 PER CENT. IN THE CASE OF THE BORROWING
PROGRAMS FOR STATE WORKS, THIS WOULD BE BEFORE TAKING
ACCOUNT OF THE OFFSETS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION. IN
ADDITION, WE ARE PREPARED TO SUPPORT SPECIAL TEMPORARY
ALLOCATIONS FOR QUEENSLAND, IN 130TH THE GOVERNMENTAL
AND SEMI-GO'TEP. NENT AREAS, FOR FLOOD RESTORATION WORK,
AND ALSO CERTAIN ADDITIONS TO THE " LARGER" AUTHORITIES
PROGRAMS FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA A
PERMANENT ADDITION FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND A SPECIAL
TEMPORARY ADDITION FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
IN FIGURE TERMS, THIS MEANS THAT WE WILL
SUPPORT, SUBJECT TO THE USUAL CONDITIONS, A
STATE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM OF ' 935 MILLION. THIS CONSISTS
OF A " BASIC" PROGRAM OF i, 925 MILLION, WHICH IS AN
INCREASE OF 10 PER CENT BEFORE TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE
OFFSETS FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, PLUS A SPECIAL TEMPORARY
ALLOCATION FOR QUEENSLAND OF APPROXIMATELY $ 10 MILLION
FOR FLOOD RESTORATION WORK.
THE " LARGER" AUTHORITIES PROGRAM OF $ 636 MILLION
WHICH WE PROPOSE CONSISTS OF A " BASIC" PROGRAM OF
$ 610.5 MILLION AN INCREASE OF 10 PER CENT PLUS A
PERMANENT ADDITION OF $ 10 MILLION FOR NEW SOUTH WALES AND
SPECIAL TEMPORARY ADDITIONS OF $ 9.6 MILLION FOR QUEENSLAND / 27 
27.
AND $ 6 MILLION FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IN ADDITION sTATES HAVE SUBMITTED
AN ESTIMATED " SMALLER" AUTHORITIES BORROWING REQUIREMENT
OF $ 162 MILLION, COMPARED WITH ESTIMATED ACTUAL RAISINGS
THIS YEAR OF ' 0143 MILLION; IN LINE WITH PAST PRACTICE,
NO OVERALL LIMIT lS PROPOSED FOR THESE BORROWINGS.
DETAILS WILL BE CONVEYED IN THE LOAN COUNCIL
MEETINGS. WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT ALL THESE PROGRAMS,
WHETHER OURS OR THE STATES, HAS BEEN AGAINST THE SETTING
THAT I MENTIONED EARLY IN MY STATEMENT THAT GOVERNMENT
SPENDING MUST PLAY ITS PART IN THE POLICY OF RESTRAINT.
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THIS WILL BE ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE
PREMIERS AS IT IS BY US.
HAVING SAID THAT, I WANT TO TURN FINALLY TO
WHAT I SAID IN CONCLUDING MY OPENING ADDRESS TO THE
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST YEAR.
I EXPRESSED THE HOPE THEN " THAT THIS WILL BE
-BOTH THE LAST OF THE OLD-STYLE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND
THE FIRST OF A NEW TYPE".
I SAID THEN, AND STILL BELIEVE, THAT OUR EXISTING
STRUCTURES ARE INADEQUATE FOR " TRULY CONSTRUCTIVE, TRULY
CO-OPERATIVE FEDERALISM".
DURING THE PAST 12 MONTHS WE HAVE-WRITTEN TO EACH
OTHER IN GREATER DEPTH AND BREADTH THAN, I BELIEVE IT WOULD
./ 28 
28.
BE TRUE TO SAY, PRIME MINISTERS AND PREMIERS HAVE DONE AT
ANY TIME SINCE FEDERATION. OUR OFFICERS HAVE MET ON
MANY OCCASIONS AND SO ALSO HAVE OUR MITNISTERIAL COLLEAGUES.
THERE ARE MANY AREAS WHERE WE HAVE FOUND
DlFFERENCES, BUT THERE ARE MANY MORE IN WHICH WE HAVE
QUICKLY BEEN ABLE TO REACH AGREEMENT. AND I PAY TRIBUTE
TO ALL OF YOU FOR WHAT YOU HAVE DONE IN HELPING US IN
THE NEW OUTREACHES OF GOVERNMENT TO SERVE THE PEOPLE
THROUGH COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ANI THE
LIKE. I LOOK TO CONTINUING CLOSE CONTACT AND
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US. SUCH CONTACT AND CO-OPERATION
EXTENDSACROSS THE FIELDS OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, HOUSING,
TRANSPORT, LAND, THE ENVIRONMENT AND URBAN IMPROVEMENT
AS WELL AS THE IMPORTANT AREAS OF MINING AND OF ABORIGINAL
DEVELOPMENT. IF WE ARE TO MAKE PROGRESS TOWARDS A COW-ION
UNDERSTANDING AND ATTITUDES TOWARDS NATIONAL PRIORITIES,
IT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR US TO MAINTAIN REGULAR CONTACT.
I LOOK TO CONSULTATION EITHER AMONG OURSELVES OR, WITH
OUR AGREEMENT, AMONG THOSE OF OUR COLLEAGUES WHO ARE
CARRYING THE MAIN RESPONSIBILITY, OR AT OFFICER LEVEL.
ONE PARTICULAR AREA I HAVE IN MIND IS THE
WELFARE AND ENVIRONMENT OF THOSE WHO LIVE IN OUR CITIES,
AND PARTICULARLY OUR GREAT CAPITALS. WE WILL BE PROPOSING
THAT MINISTERS AND OFFICIALS DEVOTE THEIR ENERGIES DURING
THE REST OF THIS YEAR TO A RENEWED CO-OPERATIVE ATTEMPT
/ 29 
29.
AT CLARIFYING ISSUES ON WHICH CO-OPERATIVE ACTION IS
ESSENTIAL AND ADVISING APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS.
LET US DEMONSTRATE TO THE PEOPLE WHOM WE ALL
SERVE THAT WE CAN TRANSCEND THE DIFFERENCES WHICH
SEPARATE US AND SEEK TOGETHER A COMMON BASIS FOR ACTION
ON ISSUES THAT AFFECT EVERY CITIZEN. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
TO THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE FEDERAL
COUNCIL OF THE TRANSPORT WORKERS' UNION OF
AUSTRALIA, CANDERRA, 12 JUNE 197L4
IN NO AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY IS THERE A
GREATER NEED FOR MODERNISATION AND REFORM THAN IN PUBLIC
TRANSPORT. IN NO AREA ARE THERE GREATER CONSTITUTIONAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE OBSTACLES IN THE WAY OF SUCH REFORM, IN NO AREA
IS THE COST TO THE PUBLIC OF OUR PRESENT ADMlINISTRATIVE
CONFUSION AND PHYSICAL D'ILAPIDATION GREATER AND MORE ENTRENCHED.
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEMS ARE OUTDATED, INEFFICIENT AND UNECONOMICAL.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM IS FRAGMENTED AND VAGUELY DEFINED.
TRANSPORT IS THE CINDERELLA SERVICE OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR. IT
WILL-REMAIN SO UNTIL FAR-REACHING REFORMS ARE ACHIEVED.
LOOK AT THE DIMENSIONS OF THE PROBLEM. WE ALL KNOW
THE NOTOROUS BURDEN THAT OUR RAILWAYS HAVE INHERITED FROM A
COL0141AL PAST. THE NATION IS STILL PAYING A HEAVY PRICE FOR
RAILWAY SYSTEMS CENTRALISED ON STATE CAPITALS AND CONSTRUCTED
ON INCOMPATIBLE GAUGES. THE POWER OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
TO LEGISLATE ON TRANSPORT IS ILL-DEFINED. APART FROM A GENERAL
POWER TO LEGISLATE IN RESPECT OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TERRITORIES,
THERE IS NO SPECIFIC PROVISION IN THE CONSTITUTION GIVIN4G THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT POWER IN RELATION TO ROADS OR ROAD
TRANSPORT. OUR POWERS IN RESPECT OF INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND
EXPORT ROADS IN FACT DERIVE FROM OUR POWERS OVER TRADE AND
COMMERCE. 
-2-
FOR MANY YEARS THE STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN AN
INSUPPORTABLE BURDEN ON STATE GOVERNMENTS, DISTORTING THEIR
BUDGETS AND DEPLETING THEIR RESOURCES AT THE EXPENSE OF OTHER
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES, ALL'FORMS OF TRANSPORT URBANI
RURAL AND INTERSTATE HAVE FALLEN DEEPER AND DEEPER IN DEBT
AND OBSOLESCENCE, THE PROBLEM HAS BEEN THAT WHILE THE
STATES HAVE LACKED THE FUNDS TO PROVIDE MODERN TRANSPORT, THE
COMMONWEALTH-IN GENERAL HAS LACKED THE POWERS, ON TOP OF
THAT WE HAVE A MULTIPLICITY OF TRANSPORT UNIONS, ORGANISED ON
A FRAGMENTED FEDERAL BASIS, TENDING TO REINFORCE AND PERPETUATE
THE INEFFICIENCIES ENGENDERED BY INTERSTATE RIVALRY,
THE GOVERNMENTS AIM IS TO PROVIDE A NATIONAL
TRANSPORT POLICY WHICH WILL ENSURE THAT EACH FORM OF TRANSPORT
FULFILS THE ROLE TO WHICH IT IS BEST SUITED WHETHER ROAD,
RAIL, SEA OR AIR, WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMBER OF IMPORTANT STEPS,
WE AMALGAMATED THE OLD DEPARTMENTS OF SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT
AND CIVIL AVIATION, WITHIN NORMAL LIMITS, AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT TRANSPORT ACTIVITIES ARE NOW CONDUCTED WITHIN ONE
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, THIS ENSURES OPTIMUM CO-ORDINATION
AND A TRANSPORT SYSTEM CAPABLE OF COPING EFFECTIVELY WITH
DEMANDS AT MINIMUM COST TO THE NATION, THIS POLICY IS IN
DIRECT CONTRAST TO THE COMPLETE LACK OF CO-ORDINATION UNDER
PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATIONS, I REMIND YOU THAT IT IS THE POLICY
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY TO SEEK A REFERENDUM TO GIVE THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT COMPLETE POWERS TO MAKE LAWS WITH RESPECT
TO ALL FORMS OF TRANSPORT, MEANWHILE WE ARE MAKING GRANTS TO THE STATES
TO UPGRADE THEIR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT; WE ARE INCREASING 
-3-
OUR GRANTS FOR ROADS; AND WE WILL CO-OPERATE WITH THE STATES
IN RESPECT OF ROAD SAFETY, ROADS AND UNIFORM ROAD LAWS,
OUR BASIC AIM IS TO INCREASE EFFICIENCY AND IMPROVE SERVICE
TO THE PEOPLE, THE STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS ARE THE BEST, OR RATHER
THE WORST, EXAMPLE OF THE INADEQUACY OF OUR TRANSPORT SERVICES,
IT WILL HELP IF I EXPLAIN EXACTLY HOW WE APPROACH THIS
PROBLEM AND THE DIFFICULTIES THAT FACE US, BRIEFLY, THE
STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN STARVED OF THE CAPITAL RESOURCES
NEEDED TO MAINTAIN THEIR COMPETITIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY, THEY
ARE GEARED TO OPERATE ON A STATE LEVEL RATHER THAN A NATIONAL
LEVEL, FOR THE MOST PART THEY OPERATE WITH ANTIQUATED ROLLING
STOCK AND EQUIPMENT, YET AUSTRALIA NEEDS A MODERN, EFFICIENT
RAILWAY SYSTEM TO PLAY ITS PROPER ROLE IN THE NATION'S
DEVELOPMENT, IT WAS FOR THIS REASON THAT IN 1972 IN ONE OF THE
FIRST ACTS OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT I OFFERED TO ACCEPT
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE PREPARED TO
OFFER THEM, VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND REFUSED EVEN TO DISCUSS THE
OFFER, DISCUSSIONS WITH THE OTHER FOUR STATES HAVE BEEN GOING
ON FOR SOME TIMEI AND IT IS HOPED THAT DECISIONS CAN BE MADE ON
TWO OF THEM SHORTLY, TO ENABLE OUR PROGRAM TO REVITALISE THE
INTERSTATE RAILWAY NETWORKS TO GET UNDER WAY, FOR THIS PURPOSE,
THE BUREAU OF TRANSPORT ECONOMICS, AT THE REQUEST OF THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE TRANSPORT MINISTER IS EVALUATING MAINLINE UPGRADING
PROGRAMS TO ENABLE AN ORDER OF PRIORITY FOR WORKS TO BE ESTABLISHED, 
-IIIN
SOME STATES THERE HAS BEEN CONSIDERABLE PROGRESS. AGREEMENTS
HAVE BEEN SIGNED WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO BUILD STANDARD-GAUGE
LINES FROM TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS AND TO CONNECT ADELAIDE
TO THE EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE LINE AT CRYSTAL BROOK, THE
COMPLETION OF THE LATTER PROJECT WILL MEAN THAT ALL MAINLAND
CAPITAL CITIES WILL BE FINALLY CONNECTED TO STANDARD GAUGE.
THERE REMAINS, HOWEVER, A SIGNIFICANT SHORTAGE OF ROLLING STOCK
SUITABLE FOR. USE ON THE INTERSTATE RAIL NETWORK, AND THE STATE
RAILWAYS ARE HAVING TO TURN AWAY BUSINESS. THIS SHORTAGE MUST
BE OVERCOME. THE GOVERNMENT IS CURRENTLY LOOKING AT A
PROPOSAL TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL ROLLING STOCK FOR THE STATES
THROUGH THE COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS, DUE TO BE RENAMED THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS.
ONE OF OUR GREAT INSTRUMENTS FOR THE REFORM AND
CO-ORDINATION OF NATIONAL TRANSPORT WILL BE THE INTER-STATE
COMMISSION. THE GOVERNMENT WILL INTRODUCE A BILL TO REESTABLISH
THE COMMISSION WHEN PARLIAMENT RESUMES. IN MY 1972
POLICY SPEECH I SAID:
" THE INTER-STATE COMMISSION WAS INTENDED TO END
THE CENTRALISATION FOSTERED BY ALL THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THEIR RAILWAY SYSTEMS. IT
SHOULD NOW PROVIDE NOT ONLY FOR THE CO-ORDINATION
OF OUR SIX MAINLAND RAILWAY SYSTEMS AND OUR MAJOR
PORTS IN THE PERIOD BEFORE THE COMMONWEALTH, LIKE
OTHER FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS, INEVITABLY TAKES
RESPONSIBILITY FOR RAILWAYS AND PORTS; IT IS
ALSO THE IDEAL INSTRUMENT FOR CO-ORDINATING OUR
MAJOR ROADS AND SHIPPING LINES AND AIRLINES AND
PIPELINES... 
" A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL PROMPTLY
RESTORE THE MACHINERY THE CONSTITUTION INTENDED
AND VEST IT WITH THE COMMONWEALTH'S FULL
CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS TO PLAN AND PROVIDE
MODERN MEANS OF COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE
STATES,"
THE PLANNING NECESSARY FOR THE RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE COMMISSION IS BEING CARRIED OUT IN THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT.
As I UNDERTOOK IN MY POLICY SPEECH LAST APRIL, WE WILL
INTRODUCE LEGISLATION FOR THE COMMISSION THIS YEAR, ,/ 6 
-6-
I WANT TO DEAL IN A MOMENT WITH SOME ISSUES OF SPECIAL
CONCERN TO YOUR UNION, FIRST LET ME TOUCH BRIEFLY ON THREE
AREAS WHERE THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN PROMPT ACTION TO IMPROVE
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEM,
URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN THE 1973-74 BUDGET THE TREASURER
ANNOUNCED AN ALLOCATION OF $ 32,1 MILLION FOR ASSISTANCE TO THE
STATES FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROJECTS IN 1973-74 ( INCLUDING
$ 1 MILLION FOR RESEARCH AND PLANNING), A FURTHER $ 1140. MILLION
IS TO BE PROVIDED IN FUTURE YEARS FOR PROJECTS COMMENCED IN
1973-74, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FINANCING
OF THE COST OF APPROVED PROJECTS ON A GRANTS BASIS, THREE
STATES VICTORIA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA
HAVE SO FAR SIGNED THE AGREEMENT UNDER WHICH FUNDS ARE TO BE
PROVIDED, THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT ADVISED LAST WEEK
THAT IT IS WILLING TO SIGN THE AGREEMENT IN ITS PRESENT FORM,
AND ARRANGEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE FOR THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
TO SIGN THE AGREEMENT THIS WEEK, TASMANIA HAS ALSO ACCEPTED
THE AGREEMENT, ,/ 7 
-7-
INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND EXPORT ROADS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
HAVE PROVIDED ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES FOR ROADS SINCE 1926, THE
CURRENT COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS LEGISLATION WILL EXPIRE ON
JUNE, IN MY ELECTION POLICY SPEECH ON 29 APRIL, I ANNOUNCED
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PRESS AHEAD WITH
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A NATIONAL ROADS SYSTEM IN THOSE AREAS WHICH
FALL WITHIN ITS OWN CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES, IN PARTICULAR,
IT WOULD IN FUTURE TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE WHOLE COST OF
CONSTRUCTING AND MAINTAINING THE PRINCIPAL ROAD BETWEEN STATE
CAPITALS, AND OF EXPORT ROADS OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE,
INCLUDING NORTHERN BEEF ROADS, OTHER RURAL ROADS JOINING MINES
TO SEAPORTS, AND URBAN ROADS TO MAJOR SEA AND AIR TERMINALS,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE LAST FRIDAY I ANNOUNCED
THAT THE NEW ROADS ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION WOULD APPROPRIATE
A TOTAL OF $ 1,120 MILLION IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS FOR ROADS IN THE STATES, OF THIS
SUM, $ 400 MILLION WILL BE ALLOCATED OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS
FOR INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS AND EXPORT ROADS, THE NEW ROADS
ASSISTANCE LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST SESSION
OF THE NEW PARLIAMENT, ,/ 8 
SAFETY STANDARDS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACTIVELY INVOLVED
WITH THE STATES IN FORMULATING MOTOR VEHICLE STANDARDS AND
TRAFFIC LAWS ON A NATIONAL BASIS, THIS IS BEING DONE THROUGH
THE AUSTRALIAN TRANSPORT ADVISORY COUNCIL, WHICH HAS A SERIES
OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES, THE Tll, U PARTICIPATES IN THOSE CONCERNED
WITH VEHICLE PERFORMANCE, TRAFFIC CODES AND TRANSPORT OF
DANGEROUS GOODS, THE COUNCIL HAS ENDORSED THE AUSTRALIAN DESIGN
RULES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY, WHICH INITIALLY APPLIED TO
CARS BUT ARE BEING EXTENDED TO TRUCKS AND BUSES, THE COUNCIL
IS ALSO CONCERNED WITH SAFETY OF INTERSTATE BUSES AND HAS
ENDORSED A UNIFORM SCHEME OF COMPULSORY INSPECTIONS, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PREPARED TO LEGISLATE TO COVER
INTERSTATE OPERATORS NOT CONTROLLED BY STATES, FOLLOWING
A RECOMMENDATION BY THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ROAD SAFETY, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO DECIDED TO SET UP A IATIONAL AUTHORITY ON
ROAD SAFETY AND STANDARDS TO ADVISE THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT
ON ROAD SAFETY, INCLUDING PROPOSALS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
THE STATES FOR THIS PURPOSE, 
THE CREATION OF A MODERN EFFICIENT TRANSPORT SYSTEM
REQUIRES THE CO-OPERATION OF TRANSPORT WORKERS AND THEIR UNIONS,
YOUR INDUSTRY DEMANDS A STRONG, MODERN, UNITED UNION, THE
DIFFICULTIES OF DEALING WITH DIFFERENT STATES AND TRANSPORT
AUTHORITIES ARE GREAT ENOUGH, SUCH DIFFICULTIES ARE INCREASED
IF THE TRANSPORT UNIONS THEMSELVES ARE INEFFICIENTLY ORGANISED
OR WASTE THEIR ENERGIES IN INTERNAL CONFLICTS, IN SHORT, WE
NEED A RESPONSIBLE APPROACH FROM YOU TO HELP US IMPLEMENT
OUR IMPORTANT PROGRAMS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE NATION AND THE
INDUSTRY, TRANSPORT UNIONS MUST WORK TOGETHER TO HELP US
COMPLETE OUR TASK,
THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE NEED TO KEEP UNIONS
FULLY INFORMED AND INVOLVED IN MATTERS THAT AFFECT YOU, WE
HAVE DONE OUR BEST TO DO SO. lIE INVITED A UNION REPRESENTATIVE
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DISCUSSIONS ON THE TRANSFER OF STATE
RAILWAYS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IF
A DECISION TO TRANSFER IS MADE A CONFERENCE WILL BE CALLED OF
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT. OFFICERS, AC, TU, AND UNION
REPRESENTATIVES TO ENSURE THAT THE TRANSITION PERIOD IS
SMOOTHLY CARRIED OUT, 
-1-
UNION GOODWILL
WILL BE ESSENTIAL IN FORMULATING A NATIONAL TRANSPORT POLICY,
YOU HAVE AN INDUSTRY WITH MANY DIFFERENT AND SOMETIMES
COMPETING UNIONS, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, FOR EXAMPLE, ENGINEDRIVERS
AND MEN SERVICING ROLLING STOCK BELONG TO A STATE UNION
DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS EMPLOYEES,
THIS SITUATION HAS SIGNIFICANTLY DELAYED OUR NEGOTIATIONS TO
TAKE OVER THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS, MY POINT IS SIMPLY
THAT DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE NOT CONDUCIVE TO A NATIONAL
TRANSPORT POLICY, THEY MUST BE REDUCED, IF A NATIONAL RAILWAY
SYSTEM BECOMES A REALITY, THEN A NATIONAL UNION REPRESENTING
RAILWAY EMPLOYEES WILL BE NEEDED TO LOOK AFTER INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS,
WAGES AND CONDITIONS'OF SERVICE ON A NATIONAL SCALE, I HOPE
YOU WILL WORK TOWARDS IT, / 11 
THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO A POLICY OF ENCOURAGING
THE AMALGAMATION OF TRADE UNIONS, ITS ATTEMPTS LAST YEAR
TO AMEND THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT TO MAKE
AMALGAMATION. PROCEDURES SIMPLER WERE FRUSTRATED TWICE BY THE
SENATE, WHILE THE NUMBER OF UNIONS IN AUSTRALIA HAS DECLINED
SLOWLY OVER THE YEARS FROM 375 IN 1956 TO 305 IN 1972 THIS
LARGE NUMBER OF SEPARATE UNIONS REPRESENTS A TOTAL MEMBERSHIP
OF A LITTLE OVER 2 MILLION, SUCH A DISPERSAL OF PEOPLE
AMONG SO MANY SEPARATE UNIONS HAS SERIOUS IMPLICATIONS, THERE IS
THE INEVITABLE DUPLICATION OF WORK AND RESOURCES WHICH PRODUCES
WASTED EFFORT, THE FRAGMENTATION OF UNION RESOURCES IN TERMS
OF STAFF, FINANCE AND FACILITIES IMPOSES GRAVE LIMITATIONS ON
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THEIR WORK, RESEARCH RESOURCES OF UNIONS
LIBRARIES AND RESEARCH STAFF ARE MEAGRE AND SUFFER BADLY IN
ANY COMPARISON WITH HIGHLY ORGANISED EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS, AND
AS WE KNOW, THE LARGE NUMBER OF UNIONS GIVES RISE TO DEMARCATION
DISPUTES WHICH ARE A COMMON OCCURRENCE IN THIS COUNTRY,
AT PRESENT, FOR AN AMALGAMATION PROPOSAL TO BE ADOPTED,
TWO CONDITIONS MUST BE SATISFIED: AT LEAST HALF THE MEMBERS MUST
VOTE AND MORE THAN A HALF OF THE FORMAL VOTES MUST EE IN FAVOUR
OF THE AMALGAMATION, UNDER THE GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSALS IT WOULD
BE NECESSARY MERELY FOR A MAJORITY OF THOSE VOTING TO APPROVE OF
THE PROPOSALS: IT WILL NOT BE NECESSARY FOR 50 PER CENT OF
THE MEMBERS TO VOTE IN AN AMALGAMATION, 
THE KEY TO INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY IS EFFICIENt EMPLOYEE
ORGANISATION, WHILE OUR OPPONENTS HAVE OBSTRUCTED OUR EFFORTS
TO MODERNISE AND DEMOCRATISE AUSTRALIAN TRADE UNIONS, UNION
CAN STILL WORK FOR MORE RESPONSIBLE AND EFFICIENT ORGANISATION
IN THEIR OWN WAY, I COMPLEMENT THE TWU, ON THE AWARD
RECENTLY NEGOTIATED FOR YOUR MEMBERS IN THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY
AND THOSE EMPLOYED BY GENERAL CARTAGE FIRMS UNDER THE FEDERAL
TRANSPORT WORKS AWARD A KEY AWARD WITH A BEARING ON THE WHOLE
TRANSPORT INDUSTRY, THIS AWARD WAS NEGOTIATED BY DIRECT AND
FREE DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE PARTIES, IT INCLUDES A SETTLEMENT
OF DISPUTES PROCEDURE WHICH THE GOVERNMENT REGARDS AS ESSENTIAL
TO GOOD INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, ADHERENCE TO THE SPIRIT OF SUCH
A PROCEDURE BY ALL PARTIES SHOULD ENSURE THAT THE PRODUCTIVE
CAPACITY OF THE INDUSTRY AND THE REAL INCOME OF EMPLOYEES ARE
NOT IMPAIRED BY INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES, ,/ 13 
THERE IS A PARTICULAR PROBLEM IN YOUR INDUSTRY WHICH
TYPIFIES THE ARCHAIC CONDITION OF OUR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS,
WE HAVE FIVE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION REGISTRATION SYSTEMS IN
THIS COUNTRY, THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT REQUIRES
AN EMPLOYER OR EMPLOYEE ORGANISATION TO BE REGISTERED UNDER
THE ACT BEFORE IT CAN REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION SYSTEM, THERE IS A SIMILAR
REQUIREMENT IN.-THE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION OF
HEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND WESTERN
AUSTRALIA. IN ORDER TO REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE SYSTEMS IT IS NECESSARY FOR A FEDERAL UNION TO
HAVE ITS MEMBERS IN EACH OF THE FOUR STATES IN A UNION
REGISTERED UNDER THE STATE LEGISLATION,
THE RESULT IS THAT THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE
BRANCH OF A FEDERAL UNION AND A STATE UNION ARE OFTEN
AMALGAMATED, WITH THE SAME OFFICERS, BOOKS, THE ONE SYSTEM
OF MEETINGS, ONE MEMBER REGISTER AND ONE ELECTION OF OFFICERS,
SOMETIMES THE RULES OF EITHER THE STATE OR FEDERAL UNION ARE
ADHERED TO, THE OTHER SET BEING IGNORED, SOMETIMES A MIXTURE
OF RULES IS ADOPTED, THE WHOLE SYSTEM CAUSES INDUSTRIAL STRIFE
THROUGH DEMARCATION DISPUTES AND COMPETITION FOR UNION
MEMBERSHIP WITHIN THE SAME INDUSTRY, s/ 1/ 4 
-114
WE HAVE TRIED TO REMEDY THIS PROBLEM. THE INDUSTRIAL
COURT IN FEBRUARY 19F-9 DREW ATTENTION TO THE URGENCY OF THE SITUATION
AFTER HEARING AN APPLICATION INVOLVING YOUR UNION AND ITS NEW SOUTH
WALES BRANCH. AT THE CONCLUSION OF ITS JUDGEMENT IN MOORE v DOYLE,
THE INDUSTRIAL COURT SAID:
" A SYSTEM OF TRADE UNION ORGANISATION IS URGENTLY NEEDED
W'JHICH WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT ITS RELEVANT
MEMBERS IN BOTH THE FEDERAL AND STATE ARBITRATION SYSTEMS
AND IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES
TO EXAMINE THE QUESTION WHETHER ORGANISATIONS AND TRADE
UNIONS CAN BE PROVIDED WITH SUCH A SYSTEM.
". WE HAVE DECIDED TO REFER OUR JUDGMENT IN THIS MATTER AND
THESE REMARKS TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE COMMONWEALTH
IN THE HOPE THAT IT MAY BE POSSIBLE, AFTER CONSULTATION
BETWEEN COMMONWEALTH AND STATE ATTORNEYS-GENERAL, THE TRADE
UNIONS, BOTH FEDERAL AND STATE, AND OTHER INTERESTED GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES TO ARRANGE FOR THE EXAMINATION OF THE IMPORTANT
ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS TO WHICH WE HAVE REFERRED." I
DESPITE THIS URGENT APPEAL THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT AND
THE ANTI-LABOR STATE GOVERNMENTS DID NOTHING. SO IN JANUARY LAST
YEAR I WROTE TO THE PREMIERS OF N'EW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND AND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA SUGGESTING THAT THEY CONSIDER ADOPTING A SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL AIMED AT PROVIDING SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM.
THE PROPOSAL PROVIDED FOR THE "/ RECOGNITION" I OF A STATE BRANCH OF
A FEDERAL UNION UNDER STATE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION.
A " RECOGNISED" STATh BRANCH WOULD NOT HAVE A LEGAL IDENTITY
DISTINCT FROM THE FEDERAL UNION BUT WOULD EXIST AS PORTION OF
THE FEDERAL UNION AND ACT AS THE FEDERAL UNION WITHIN THE STATE
INDUSTRIAL JURISDICTION. OUEENSLAND REFUSED TO C07OPERATE AND
WE HAD NO RESPONSE AT ALL FROM 14EW SOUTH WALES, THE STATE WHERE
THE PROBLEM IS MOST ACUTE. 
[ EVERTHELESS, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ITSELF PASSED
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT TO DEAL
WITH SOME OF THE PROBLEMS RAISED BY THIS CASE. IN ADDITION
THE GOVERNMENT APPOINTED MR JUSTICE J. B. SWEENEY, ASSISTED
BY MR [ fCGARVIE, AND MRK. D. MARKS, TO CONDUCT
THE INQUIRY INTO THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE CASE. HIS HONOUR'S
REPORT IS EXPECTED ABOUT THE END OF THIS MONTH.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED FROM THE START THAT MODERN AND
EFFICIENT PUBLIC TRANSPORT DEPENDS ON MODERN AND EFFICIENT
ADMINISTRATION AND MODERN AND EFFICIENT UNIONS. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS PLAYED ITS PART. ' IE HAVE BEEN GENEROUS WITH
FUNDS AND GENEROUS WITH IDEAS AND INITIATIVES. WE LOOK
CONFIDENTLY TO THE CO-OPERATION OF THE STATES AND YOUR GREAT
UNION IN BRINGING ABOUT A NEW DEAL, LONG OVERDUE AND LONG
AWAITED, FOR TRANSPORT IN OUR COUNTRY. 



g3
EMBARGO 8.00 P~ rm. SATURDJAY 90 JUNE 197LI
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE SECOND NATIONA~ L CONVENTION OF THE INDUJSTRIAL RELATIONS
SOCIETY " INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS THE POWER GAME"
CHEVRON HOTEL, SUJRFERS PARADISE, SATURDAY 29 JUNEF 3,97
THIS IS MY SECOND ADDRESS AS PRIME MINISTER TO THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY OF AUSTRALIA. SINCE I SPOKE TO
YOU JUST OVER A YEAR AGO AT TERRIGAL, I SUPPOSE I HAVE LEARNED
MORE ABOUT THE SORT OF " POWER GAME" THAT TOOK PLACE IN THE
BRITISH TV' SERIES THAT CARRIED THAT TITLE. IHAVE HAD ONE
EXPERIENCE THAT NEVER SEEMED TO THREATEN THE ORDERED
MACHIAVELLIAN LIVES OF THE PROTAGONISTS OF THAT SERIES-I
HAVE SURVIVED AN ELECTION. HAVING SAID THAT, I WILL IGNORE THE
OBVIOUS ALLUSION To TV DRAMAS CONTAINED IN THE TITLE OF
YOUR SEMINAR, INSTEAD, FOR A MOMENT I W4ILL PURSUE AN ANALOGY
APPROPRIATE TO OUR SPORTS-MINDED NATION.
IN THE POWER GAME OF INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS A MOST PECULIARLY MIXED ROLE. AS A
LAW-MAKER, IT HAS SOME OF THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE GOVERNING BODY 0-
A SPORTING CODE. IT HAS SOME OF THE FUNCTIONS OF AN UMPIRE OR
REFEREE IN HELPING . TO SEE THOSE RULES IMPLEMENTED. AT TIMES
IT ACTS AS A COACH IN HELPING TO GUIDE THE OPPOSING TEAMS IN THE
PLAYING OF THE GAME. AND, AS A MAJOR EMPLOYER, THE GOVERThIENT
IS ALSO, OF COURSE, A KEY PLAYER. THE ONLY ROLE IT H4AS
ABANDONED SINCE 1972 IS THAT OF TRYING INEFFECTUALLY TO BE THE
EQUIVALENT OF THlE JUDICIAL TRIBUNAL OF A SPORT IN COLLECTING
FINES FOR WHAT SOME MIGHT JUDGE TO BE FOUL PLAY. DESPITE THE
COMPLEXITY OF ITS POSITION, THE OBJECTIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ROLE IS CLEAR: IT'MUST SEEK TO REDUCE THE HEAT, MINIMISE THE
CONFLICT IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS. 
TO DO THIS IT MUST PURSUE TWO GOALS. IT MUST CREATE
A BODY OF LAWS TO ENABLE AUSTRALIA TO HAVE THE MOST MODERN
INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM TO AV/ OID UNNECESSARY CONFLICTS. IT MUST ALSO
HELP CREATE AN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH THE
FINANCIAL CAUSES OF MANY DISPUTES ARE AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE
ERADICATED. THE PROVISION OF MODERN INDUSTRIAL LAWS WAS THE PRIME
AIM OF THE AMENDMENTS TO THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT
WHICH THE GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED INTO THE PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR.
THESE AMENDMENTS WERE TWICE REJECTED BY THE SENATE AND THE
GOVERNMEN4T WAS OBLIGED TO SHELVE THEM, AT LEAST TEMPORARILY.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT AIMS CONTAINED IN THOSE AMENDMENTS
WAS THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE AMALGAMATION OF TRADE UNIONS.
THE EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF UNIONS IS ONE OF THE GREAT
PROBLEMS DEDEVILLING INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
THERE HAS BEEN A SLIGHT DECLINE IN THE NUMEER OVER THE YEARSFROM
375 IN 1956 TO 305 IN -1972 B3UT THAT IS STILL TOO MANY.
OF THOSE UNIONS, 158 HAD LESS THAN 1,000 MEMBERS; 82 HAD BETWEEN
1,00Q0 AND 5,000 MEMBERS; 28 BETWEEN 5,000 AND 20,000;
23 BETWEEN 20,000 AND 50,000; AND ONLY 14 HAD A MEMBERSHIP
OF OVER 50,0OOR. ONE NEEDS TO LOOK NO FURTHER THAN GOVERN4MENT
INSTRUMENTALITIES TO GET SOME IDEA OF THE EFFECT THIS HAS.
A TOTAL OF 28 UNIONS ARE REPRESENTED IN THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL' S
DEPARTMENT; WORKERS IN THE SYDNEY MAIL EXCHANGE ARE COVERED
BY NO LESS THAN 20 UNIONS. THE WORKFORCE OF TRANS-AUSTRALIA
AI . RLINES IS COVERED BY NO FEWER THAN 26 UNIONS, THiE MEN AND
WOMEN EMPLOYED BY THE COMMONWEALTHi RAILWAYS DELONG TO J14 UNIONS. 
I NEED ONLY DESCRIBE AN AIRLINE JOURNEY TO INDICATE THE
ABSURD COMPLEX-ITY THAT EXISTS. IF I WERE TO FLY FROM SYDNEY TO
MELBOURNE I WOULD RUN THE GAMUT OF AT LEAST 3 UNIONS. MY FLIGHT
BOOKING W1OULD BE TAKEN BY A MEMBER OF THE FEDERATED CLERKS UNION.
I WOULD BE DRIVEN TO THE AIRPORT BY A MEMBER OF THE TRANSPORT
111ORKERS UNION. MY PLANE SEAT WOULD BE ALLOCATED BY A MEMBER OF
THE FEDERATED CLERKS UION. MY BAGGAGE WOULD BE TAKEN BY A
MEMIBER OF THE TRANSPORT WORKERS UN'IONI. THE PASSENGER LIST WOULD BE
C HECKED BY A MEMBER OF THE AIRPORT TRANSPORT OFFICERS' FEDERATION.
SECURITY FOR THE FLIGHT WOULD BE HANDLED BY A MEMBER OF THE
FEDERATED MISCELLANEOUS WORKERS' UNION. THE AIRCRAFT WOULD BE
CHECKED BY MEMBERS OF THE PROFESSIONAL PADio ENGINEERS INSTITUTE
OR THE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY OF ENGINEERS OR THE AMALGAMATED ! AETAL
tIORKERS' UNION OR THE ELECTRICAL TRADES UNION, OR THE ASSOCIATION
OF LICENSED AIRCRAFT ENGINEERS. THE PLANE WOULD BE FUELED BY A
MEMBER OF THE TRANSPORT ! JORKERS UNION. IT WOUJLD BE CLEARED FOR
TAKE-OFF BY THE CIVIL AIR OPERATORS' OFFICERS ASSOCIATION. IT WOULD
BE CREWED BY MEMBERS OF THE FEDERATION OF AIR PILOTS, THE FLIGHT
ENGINEERS ASSOCIATION AND THE AIR HOSTESSES ASSOCIATION, THE FOOD
SERVED ON THE PLANE WOULD BE COOKED BY THE LIQUOR TRADES UNION.
THE EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF UNIONS CREATES PROBLEMS BOTH FOR
THEIR MEMBERS AND FOR THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE. THE FRAGMENTATION
OF UNION RESOURCES IN TERMS OF STAFF, FINANCE AND FACILITIES
IMPOSES LIMITATIONS ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THEIR WORK. THE
RESEARCH RESOURCES OF UNIONS ARE MEAGRE AND SUFFER BADLY IN
ANY COMPARISON WITH HIGHLY ORGANISED EMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS.
THE FRAGMENTA1ION CAN LEAVE UNIONS IN AN ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE POSITION
IF THEY ARE DEALING WITH A WILL ORGANISED EMPLOYERS GROUP OR A
A
MAJOR COMPANY. TAKE THIE EXAMPLE OF EM~ PLOYEES OF fM ILT I-NAT IONAL
CORPORDATION. THE AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES OF SUCH A CORPORATION MIGHT 
WELL BELONG To 6 UNIONS OR MlORE. IN ANY NEGOTIATIONS THOSE UNIONS'
ARE CONFRONTED BY AN ORGANISATION WITH THE BACKING OF ENORMOUS
FINANCIAL POWER AND OTHER RESOURCES. IT PLACES THE EMPLOYEES AT
AN ENORMOUS DISADVANTAGE FOR THEIR INTERESTS TO RE REPRESENTED
BY DIFFERENT GROUPS OF VARYING SIZE WHEN CONFRONTED BY SUCH
CORPORATE COHESION. THE DISPERSAL OF UNIONS MUST ALSO INEV/ ITABLY
DIMINISH THEIR POLITICAL INFLUENCE.
THE COMMUNITY SUFFERS BECAUSE THE LARGE NUMBER OF UNIONS GIVES
RISE TO DEMARCATION DISPUTES WHICH ARE A COMMON OCCURRENCE IN THIS
COUNTRY. AN EXAMPLE OF THE PROBLEM CAN BE FOUND IN THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL'S TEPARTMENT WHERE AT LEAST SIX UNIONS OR
ASSOCIATIONS ARE ELIGIBLE TO COVER EMPLOYEES IN THE TECHNICAL
GRADES. ACTION BY ONE ORGANISATION TO IMPROVE THE CAREER
STRUCTURE OR TO CHANGE THE RANGE OF WORK OF ITS MEMBERS CAN
IMPINGE ON THE RIGHTS OF MEMBERS OF OTHER ORGANISATIONS.
DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE A READY SOURCE OF PUBLIC
EXASPERATION WITH UNIONS. IT IS NOT SURPRISING IF THE PUBLIC
BECOMES EXTREMELY ANNOYED THAT IT IS DENIED A BASIC SERVICE FOR
SOME TIME BECAUSE OF A STRIKE FOUGHT NOT EVEN OVER WAGES AND
CONDITIONS PUT BECAUSE OF A POWER STRUGGLE BETWEEN UNIONS.
YET THE CONCILIATION AND PREITRATION ACT AT PRESENT
MAKES IT UNNECESSARILY DIFF ICULT FOR UNIONS TO AMALGAMATE.
AT PRESENT, FOR AN AMALGAMATION PROPOSAL TO BE ADOPTED, TWO
CONDITIONS MUST BE SATISFIED: AT LEAST HALF THlE MEMBERS MUST
VOTE AND MORE THAN HALF OF THE FORMAL VOTES MUST BE IN FAVOUR
OF THE AMALGAMATION. IN CONTRAST, THE GOVERNMENT ' S AMENDMENTS
WOULD MAKE IT NECESSARY MERELY FOR A MAJORITY OF THOSE VOTING
TO APPROVE OF AMIALGAMIATION; IT WOULD NO LONGER BE NECESSARY
FOR 50% OF THE UNION MEMBERS INVOLVED TO VOTE ON THE ISSUE. 11/ 5 
ALTHOUGH IT HAS BEEN TWICE REBUFFED BY THE SENATE, THE
GOVERNMENT WILL PERSIST IN ITS ATTEMPTS TO ACHIEVE THIS VITAL
LEGISLATIVE CHANGE.
THE GlOVERNMENT IS ALSO DETERMINED TO SIMPLIFY THE
PRESENT SYSTEM OF INDUSTRIAL REGISTRATION. AUSTRALIA HAS FIVE
INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION REGISTRATION SYSTEMS. THE AUSTP LIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT REQUIRES AN EMPLOYER OR
EMPLOYEE ORGANISATION TO BE REGISTERED UNDER THE ACT BEFORE
IT CAN REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION SYSTEM. THERE IS A S: MILAR REQUIREMENT IN THE
INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION LEGISLATION IN hIEW SOUTH ' JALES, QUEENSLAND,
SOUTi AUSTRALIA AND ' ESTERN AUSTRALIA. THE EFFECT OF
REGISTRATION UNDER EACH OF THESE LEGISLATIVE SYSTEMS IS THAT
EACH REGISTRATION CREATES AN ORGANISATION WITH ITS OWN LEGAL
IDENTITY. THIS CREATES ABSURD COMPLICATIONS IN INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS, COMPLICATIONS WHICH WERE POINTED OUT BY THE AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRIAL COURT IN THE CASE OF MOORE V DOYLE IN FEBRUARY ] 069.
AT THE CONCLUSION OF THEIR JUDGMENT IN THAT CASE, CHIEF JUSTICE
SPICER, MR JUSTICE SMITHERS AND PIR JUSTICE KERR ( AS HE THEN WAS)
SAID: " A SYSTEM OF TRADE UNION ORGANISATION IS URGENTLY
NEEDED WHICH WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT
ITS RELEVANT MEMBERS IN BOTH THE FEDERAL AND STATE
ARBITRATION SYSTEMS AND IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR
FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITIES TO EXAMINE THE QUESTION
WHETHER ORGANISATIONS AND TRADE UNIONS'CAN BE
PROVIDED WITH SUCH A SYSTEM.
WE HAVE DECIDED TO REFER OUR JUDGMENT IN THIS MATTER AND 
6.
THESE REMARKS TO THE ATTORNEY-C-ENERAL FOR THE COMMONWEALTH
IN THE HOPE THAT IT MAY BE POSSIBLE, AFTER CONSULTATION
BETWEEN COMONWEALTH AND STATE ATTORNEYS-GENERAL, THE TRADE
UNIONS, BOTH FEDERAL AND STATE, AND OTHER INTERESTED
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES TO ARRANGE FOR THE EXAMINATION OF
THE IMPORTANT ORGANISATIONSL MATTERS TO WHICH WE HAVE
REFERRED.
DESPITE THIS URGENT APPEAL THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT AND
THE NON-LABOR STATE GOVERNMENTS DID NOTHING. SO IN JANUARY LAST
YEAR I WROTE TO THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, QUEENSLAND AND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA SU3GESTING THAT THEY MIGHT CONSIDER ADOPTING A
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PROPOSAL AIMED AT PROVIDING SOLUTIONS TO THE
PROBLEM. THE PROPOSAL PROVIDED FOR THE " RECOGNITION" OF A STATE
BRANCH OF A FEDERAL UNION UNDER STATE INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION
LEGISLATION. A " RECOGNISED" STATE PRANCH WOULD NOT HAVE A LEGAL
IDENTITY DISTINCT FROM THE FEDERAL UNION BUT WOULD EXIST AS A
PORTION OF THE FEDERAL UNION AND ACT AS THE FEDERAL UNION WITHIN
THE STATE INDUSTRIAL JURISDICTION. THE PREMIER OF OUEENSLAND
INDICATED THAT HIS STATE DID NOT FAVOUR THE FEDERAL BODY OF THE
UNION BEING THE BODY RECOGNISED UNDER STATE LAW. THE OREMIER OF
NEW SOUTH '! ALES SAID THAT HIS GOVERNMENT WAS STILL CONSIDERING
THE MATTER.. HESTERN AUSTRALIA DID NOT REPLY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS APPOINTED AN INQUIRY UNDER
MR JUSTICE L. B. SWEENEY TO EXAMINE THE PROBLEMS DISCLOSED DY THE
MOORE V DOYLE CASE. THE JUDGE HAS BEEN ASKED TOEXAMINE THE
DESIRABILITY OF A SYSTEM OF ORGANISATION AND/ OR REGISTRATION WHICH
WOULD ENABLE THE ONE BODY TO REPRESENT ITS MEMBERS IN BOTH
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE ARBITRATION SYSTEMS, HOW THIS COULD EE
ACHIEVED, THE EFFECT OF EXISTING REGISTRATION SYSTEMS ON EMPLOYER 
AND EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS AND THE PROBLEMS AND DIFFICULTIES TO
WHICH THE P. RESENT SYSTEMS GIVE RISE. WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND
N~ EW SOUTH WALES HAVE INDICATED THEY WOULD CO-OPERATE WITH THE
COMMITTEE, WHILE THE Q~ UEENSLAND PREMIER SAID, AFTER THE OUEENSLAND
INDUSTRIAL REGISTRAR HAD INFORMED M4R JUSTICE SWEENEY OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT' S POLICY, THAT THE QUESTION OF HOW HIS GOVERNMENT
IVOULD BE ABLE TO FURTHER ASSIST THE COMMITTEE WOULD BE KEPT
UNDER REVIEW. HIS REPORT IS EXPECTED ABOUT THE END OF THIS
MONTI]. ITURN NOW TO THE SECOND GOAL WHICH THE GOVERNMENT
MUST PURSUE TO HELP MAINTAIN HARMONIOUS INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS:
THE CREATION OF AN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH
THE FINANCIAL CAUSES OF MANY DISPUTES ARE MINJIMISED. IT
SHOULD BE CLEAR TO ALL BY NOWI THAT MUCH OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACTIVITY IS DEDICATED TO THIS END. OUR POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
HAVE BEEN DIRECTED TOWARDS. REDUCING AND EV/ ENTUALLY ERADICATING
INEQUALITIES IN OUR SOCIETY WHILE AT THE SAME TIME MAINTAINING
A HEALTHY PATTERN OF EFFICIENT ECONOMIC GROWTH. AT THIS POINT
I WOULD LIKE PARTICULARLY TO EMPHASISE OUR EFFORTS TO CREATE A
MORE EQUAL SOCIETY.. THE ACHIEVEMENT OF EQUALITY MEANS MUCH MORE
THAN SIMPLY PROVIDING HIGHER WAGES AND SALARIES. IT MEANS
PROVIDING A RANGE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES TO SATISFY THE
REASONABLE NEEDS OF ALL CITIZENS A1ND TO CREATE REASONABLE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL CITIZENS. -THIS IN TURN MEANS THE
CREATION OF THE BEST COMMUNITY SERVICES THAT THE COUNTRY
CAN AFFORD. IT IS NO COINCIDENCE THAT IN OUR FIRST iSMONTHS
IN OFFICE WE HAVE CONCENTRATED SO MUCH OF OUR EFFORTS IN THE
FIELDS OF EDUCATION, HEALTH AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DFVELOPMENT. 
AN INCREASED WAGE ALONE IS NOT GOING TO ENSURE THAT A WORKER'S
CHILDREN WILL RECEIVE A PROPER EDUCATION. AN INCREASED WAGE
WILL NOT GUARANTEE THAT WORKER'S FAMILY ACCESS TO HIGH OUALITY
MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARE AT A REASONABLE COST. AN INCREASED
WAGE WILL NOT GRANT HIM ADEOUATE TRANSPORT, ROADS, CHILD CARE
FAC&gt;' flIES, RECREATION OUTLETS AND THE LIKE. IT WILL NOT
EVEN NECESSARILY GUARANTEE HIM PROPER HOUSING, PARTICULARLY
I t~ TVES IN A CITY WITH RAMPANT INFLATION IN LAND PRICES.
THE PROVISION OF ADEQ7UATE SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES
OF THIS KINE ;' 7UST DEPAND ONIBROAD COMMUNITY ACTION; AND THAT
MEANS GOVERNMENTIACTION. THAT IS WHY SO MUCH OF OUR PUBLIC
SPENDING HAS BEEN DIRECTED TOWARDS BUILDING NEW SCHOOLS AND
TRAINING NEW TEACHERS; TOWARDS ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY HEALTH
CENTRES AND HOSPITALS IN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO WHERE PEOPLE
( NOT JUST DOCTORS) LIVE; TOWARDS THE PROVISION OF BASIC
FACILITIES IN THE MASS OF SUBURBS WHICH HAVE PEEN NEGLECTED
SINCE THEIR EMERGENCE IN THE POST-WAR YEARS; TOWARDS THE
CREATION OF NEW CITIES; AND TOWARDS THE BUILDING OF MORE
HOUSING FOR LOW-INCOME EARNERS.
FORTUNATELY, THE ELECTORATE HAS JUST GIVEN THE
GOVERNMENT A FURTHER THREE YEARS IN WHICH TO PURSUE THESE
GOALS. THEIR FULL ACHIEVEMENT WILL, OF COURSE, TAKE LONGER
THAN THAT. JBUT WHEN THEY ARE ACHIEVED, WAGE AND SALARY
EARNERS WILL NO LONGER BE QUITE AS DEPENDENT ON THEIR PAY
PACKETS FOR THE SATISFACTION OF THESE NEEDS. THIS WILL, IF
YOU LIKE, MOVE ALL OF US AT LEAST SOME DISTANCE AWAY FROM
WHAT MIGHT BE TERMED AN INCOMES MENTALITY. EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITIES AND SERVICES MUST IN ITSELF REDUCE SOME OF THE
CAUSES OF CONFLICT IN OUR SOCIETY AND IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS. 
TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS AND INDEED TO ACHIEVE ANY
KIND OF RE-ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES WE MUST, OF COURSE,
MAINTAIN A HEALTHY ECONOMY. W'OULD EMPHASISE MY USE OF THE
WORD MAINTAIN IN MY LAST SENTENCE.. CONTRARY TO WHAT SOME
PROPHETS OF DOOM ARE NOW SAYING, ' IUSTRALIA HAS AN ESSENTIALLY
HEALTHY ECONOMY. D) ESPITE WHAT OUR ECONOMIC JEREMIAHS MIGHT
SAY, THE LAST 18 MONTHS HAVE BEEN MARKED BY EXCEPTIONALLY
RAPID GROWTH. LET ME GIVE A FEW EXAMPLES TO DEMONSTRATE THIS.
GROSS NATIONAL EXPENDITURE ROSE IN REAL TERMS BY 12.4 PERCENT
IN THE YEAR TO THE MIARCH QUARTER OF 19/ 4, COMPARED WITH
IN THE PREVIOUS YEAR AND PERCENT IN TH E YEAR BEFORE THAT.
GROSS NON-FARM PRODUCTION INCREASED BY PERCENT COMPARED WITH
4.2 PERCENT AND 3.3 PERCENT IN THE PREVIOUS TWO. YEARS. CIVILIAN
EMPLOYMENT INCREASED BY MORE THAN 200,000 OR 4., 5 PERCENT, THE
LARGEST PERCENTAGE INCREASE IN ANY COMPARABLE PERIOD SINCE 11I
ALTHOUGH THE SHARE MARKET . MIGHT NOT REFLECT IT, COMPANY INCOME
HAS INCREASED BY 18. q PERCENT.
SOME PROBLEMS DO EXIST IN CERTAIN INDUSTRIES. RUT I T
WOULD BE WRONG TO SEE ALL OF THOSE DIFFICULTIES AS INDICATING
AN OVERALL ECONOMIC PROBLEM OR, TO BE DEFENSIVE FOR A MOMENT,
TO BLAME THE GOVERNMENT FOR THEM. IT IS SURELY AT LEAST
QUESTIONABLE FOR A CAR MANUFACTURER TO BLAME THE 93OVERNMENT FOR
ITS FAILURE TO CAPTURE A LARGE ENOUGH SHARE OF THE MARKET FOR
ITS PRODUCTS WHEN THE LATEST FIGURES FOR MOTOR VEHICLE
REGISTRATIONS SHOWS THEY ARE RUNNING AT A HIGH LEVEL. I I/ i q 
THE FACT REMAINS, HOWEVER, THAT AUSTRALIA, IN COMMON
WITH OTHER COUNTRIES, IS UNDERGOING A PERIOD OF EXCESSIVE
INFLATION,' IN CASE ANYONE SHOULD THINK THAT THIS IS A NEW
DISCOVERY FOR US, SOME OF YOU MAY REMEMBER'MY ADDRESS TO THE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS SOCIETY IN ( MAY LAST YEAR" " IT HAS
ALREADY BECOME CLEAR," I SAID THEN, " THAT THE THREAT OF
INFLATION WILL BE THE MOST SERIOUS ECONOMIC PROBLEM FACING
OVER NMENT." AT ANOTHER POINT IN MY ADDRESS I SAID:
" LET THERE BE NO DOUBT OF HOW SERIOUSLY my GOVERNMENT REGARDS
THIS PROBLEM OR THE STRENGTH OF OUR DETERMINATION TO TACKLE IT."
' E HAVE EXHIBITED SUCH A DETERMINATION EVER SINCE WE CAME INTO
OFFICE. As SOON AS WE-WERE ELECTED IN 1972, WE REVALUED THE
DOLLAR TO CUT THE PRICE OF IMPORTS AND WE ESTABLISHED THE
DEPOSIT REQUIREMENT TO REDUCE THE INFLOW OF FOREIGN MONEYS.
WE EFFECTIVELY REVALUED THE DOLLAR TWICE AFTER THAT. V! E HAVE
TIGHTENED MONETARY POLICY TO REMOVE THE EXCESSIVE AMOUNT OF
MONEY IN THE ECONOMY, IN JULY WE CUT ALL TARIFFS By 25/ 1 IN
ORDER TO DECREASE THE PRICE OF IMPORTS AND TO RESTRAIN LOCAL
PRICE RISES BY INCREASING COMPETITION. W" E HAVE ESTABLISHED THE
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL WHICH HAS UNDOUBTEDLY PLAYED A
SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN RESTRAINING PRICE INCREA-0ES. ',-;. ITEVER OUR
CRITICS MIGHT SAY,. WE EVEN RESTRAINED THE GROWTH IN GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE, / 11 
DESPITE THESE MEASURES, WE NEED TO TAKE FURTHER
ACTION TO BEAT INFLATION. THE VERY BUOYANCY WHICH HAS BEEN
A FEATURE OF OUR ECONOMIC GROWTH HAS HAD ITS DISADVANTAGES;
DEMA1ND HAS CONTINUED TO BE EXCESSIVE. THAT IS WHY, AT THE
PREMIERS CONFERENCE EARLIER THIS MONTH, I ANNOUNCED FURTHER
MEASURES TO CURB INFLATION. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IS EXAMINING ITS OWN EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS SO THAT IT CAN PLAY
ITS PART, SAID THEN THAT WE WOULD LIMIT THE BUDGET ALLOCATION
FOR THE POST OFFICE IN 107LI-1075 TO NOT MORE THAN THE ACTUAL
AMOUNT ALLOCATED IN 1973-1974; WE WOULD PUT RESTRAINTS ON
CAPITAL WOtR-KS AND OTHER CAPITAL EXPENDITURE BY THE GOVERNMENT;
WE WOULD ABOLISH THE PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICES SUBSIDY SCHEME;
WE WOULD LIMIT THE GROWTH OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE;
WE WOULD REDUCE THE AMOUNT RECOMMEN DEDFOR SPENDING ON ROADS
BY THE BUREAU OF ROADS. AT THE SAME TIME THE GOVERNMENT FOUND
IT NECESSARY TO HOLD DOWN THE INCREASE IN FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
TO BE PROVIDED TO THE STATES IN 1074-1975, IN DOING THIS, I
CALLED ON THE STATES TO PLAY THEIR PART IN BEATING INFLATION.
THE GOVERNMENT'S MEASURES HAVE INEVITABLY AROUSED SOME
HOSTILITY. IT TAS BEING SAID THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
FORCING THE STATES TO RAISE TAXES AND CHARGES. IT IS ONLY FAIR
TO POINT OUT THAT IT COULD BE JUST AS EASILY SAID THAT THE STATES
ARE TRYING TO FORCE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT T'O RAISE IT'S TAXES
AND CHARGES. FOR IF MORE MONEY IS NEEDED FOR STATE SERVICES
IT CAN BE MADE AVAILABLE IN ONE OF ONLY TWO WAYS: EITHER BY THE
COMMONWEALTH RAISING MORE MONEY A1ND PASSING IT ON TO THE STATES
OR BY THE STATES THEMSELVES RAISING EXTRA MONEY. IT IS ALL VERY
WELL FOR THE STATES TO EXPECT THE COMMONWEALTH TO CARRY THE FULL
OPPROBRIUM FOR UNPOPULAR MEASURES AIMED AT RAISING EXTRA MONEY. 
IDO NOT THINK IT IS UNREASONABLE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO EXPECT THE STATES TO SHARE IN SUCH PROBLEM. THERE IS ANOTHER
POINT TO BE MADE ABOUT THE ACCUSATION THAT THE* AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS FORCING THE STATES TO RAISE TAXES AND CHARGES.
OUR MAIN EMPHASIS HERE IS, IN FACT, ON ECONOMIC RATIONALITYPUBLIC
ENTERPRISES -BOTH COMMON4WEALTH AND STATE MUST GO CLOSER
TO PAYING THEIR OWN WAY; THEIR SERVICES MUST BECOME MORE CHARGES
G4rU4S ERS AND LESS CHARGES ON TAXPAYERS. AT THE SAME TIME, THEY
MUST BECOME MORE EFFICIENT. ADMITTEDLY ALL GOVERNMENTS IN
AUSTRALIA FACE THE PROBLEM THAT IT IS LEFT TO THEM TO CONDUCT
THE LEAST PROFITABLE ENTERPRISES. BUT THIS SHOULD BE wo EXCUSE
FOR AVOIDING RATIONAL CHARGES AND EFFICIENT OPERATION. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACCEPTING ITS SHARE OF THE RESPONSIBILITY
IN THIS DIRECTION. IT ASKS NO MORE THAN4 THAT OF THE STATES.
AT LEAST SOME OF THE CRITICISM THAT HAS BEEN-DIRECTED
AGAINST US HAS COME FROM THE VERY PEOPLE WHO HAVE URGED ACTION
UPON US AND EVEN AT TIMES OVER THE VERY MEASURES THEY HAVE
SUGGESTED. THiE PRICE OF LAND AND HOUSING IS A GOOD EXAMPLE$
ONE OF THE MOST DAMAGING ELEMENTS IN THE INFLATIONARY BOOM
IN THE PAST YEAR OR SO HAS BEEN THE SOARING PRICE OF HOUSES.
NIOW, DUE TO THE CUTTING DOWN OF-THE PREVIOUSLY EXCESSIVE FLOW
OF FINANCE INTO BUILDING., HOUSE PRICES APPEAR TO BE TENDING TO
FLATTEN OUT. PRICES OF COSTLIER HOUSES HAVE TENDED TO DROP.
WHILE NO GOVERNMENT LIKES TO SEE INTEREST-RATES FOR HOME-BUYING
INCREASE UNDULY, WE MUST PURSUE THIS SITUATION FOR A WHILE
IF WE ARE TO HAVE ANY CHANCE OF DELIVERING A SOLID BLOW TO
INFLATION IN THIS AREA.-W~ E MUST DESTROY THE SELF-FULFILLING
PROPHECY OF MANY PEOPLE THAT THE PRICE OF LAND WILL ALWAYS RISE
MORE RAPIDLY THAN INFLATION. WE MUST ALSO REDUCE THE EXCESS DEMAND
IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR OF THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IF WE ARE TO 
NONE OF THE DECISIONS THAT WE HAVE HAD TO MAKE HAVE
BEEN EASY. WE WILL BE EXTREMELY VIGILANT. TO MAKE SURE THAT, IF
ANY. UNPREDICTABLE OR EXTREME RESULTS FLOW FROM OUR MEASURES, WE
CAN TAKE APPROPRIATE ACTION. I CERTAINLY GIVE THAT PLEDGE IN
THE AREA OF EMPLOYMENT. TESPITE THE MORE SENSATIONAL HEADLINES,
DOES ANYONE REALLY BELIEVE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY,
WHICH OWES ITS EXISTENCE AND SURVIVAL TO WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS,
WOULD PURSUE POLICIES DESIGNED TO PUT THOSE PEOPLE OUT OF WORK?
VE CAME INTO GOVERNMENT, PLEDGED TO RESTORE FULL EMPLOYMENT.
WE ACHIEVED THAT OBJECTIVE VERY QUICKLY. WE WILL CONTINUE TO
PURSUE IT. THE KIND OF ADJUSTMENT WHICH WE ARE TRYING TO MAKE
TO THE USTRALIAN ECONOMY IS A COMPLEX AND DIFFICULT EXERCISE.
WE HAVE ALREADY SHOWN A FLEXIBILITY OF APPROACH TO MEET
CHANGED NEEDS OR OVERCOME PROBLEMS THAT MIGHT ARISE, OUR
RELAXATION OF THE OVERSEAS CAPITAL DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS AND
OF STATUTORY RESERVE DEPOSITS ARE EXAMPLES OF THIS FLEXIBILITY,
THERE CAN BE NO DENYING, HOWEVER, THAT DEMAND INFLATION HAS
BEEN A PROBLEM FOR SOME TIME AND ACTION TO COUNTER HAS BEEN
NECESSARY. WHAT WE MUST DO NOW IS AVOID ANOTHER PROBLEM, COST-PUSH
INFLATION. TO DO THIS, WE WILL NEED THE CO-OPERATION OF THE
WHOLE COMMUNITY. INDUSTRY MUST MODERATE ITS PRICE INCREASES,
As. I HAVE MENTIONED, THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL HAS HELPED
IN THIS AREA, IF THE SENATE IS WILLING, WE WILL BAN COLLUSIVE
PRICE FIXING BY COMPANIES, EMPLOYEES MUST ALSO PLAY THEIR PART.
WE CANNOT CONTINUE TO HAVE ANNUAL WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES OF
THE ORDER OF 20%. 
-14-
EMPLOYEES SEEKING THESE INCREASES ARE IN DANGER OF BECOMING
LIKE SQUIRRELS IN A CAGED WHEEL: NO MATTER HOW FAST THEY RUN,
THE WHEEL ( INFLATION) ONLY GOES FASTER THEY STILL DO NOT
ADVANCE. IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS
INTERESTED IN THE IDEA OF SOME FORM OF REGULAR COST OF LIVING
ADJUSTMENTS TO WAGES AND SALARIES, OR WAGE INDEXATION, TO USE
THE CURRENTLY POPULAR TERMa EMPLOYEES WOULD NO LONGER FEEL
COMPELLED TO SEEK HUGE INCREASES AS A HEDGE AGAINST INFLATION
IF THEY WERE OFFERED SOME REAL INCOME PROTECTION. ' 4E THEREFORE
WELCOME THE DECISION OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
COMMISSION IN ITS 19/ LI ' NATIONAL WAGE CASE JUDGMENT TO CALL A
CONFERENCE "/ TO-SEE WHETHER CONSENSUS CAN BE REACHED ON THE TWO
COUNTERACTING ISSUES WAGE FIXATION METHODS AND WAGE
I NDEXAT ION" THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT A REVIEW OF THESE ISSUES IS
TIMELY. THE ' ATIONAL WAGE INCREASE OF ABOUT WEEK
BECOMES QUITE MEANINGLESS IN PROTECTING THE INTERESTS OF THE
LOWER PAID WORKERS WHILE INDUSTRY AWARDS ARE BEING INCREASED
BY AGREEMENT IN INDEPENDENT NEGOTIATIONS AT LEVELS RANGING
FROM $ 15 TO $ 25 A WEEK. THE ULTIMATE RESULT OF THIS PROCESS
WILL BE THAT THE WAGES OF WORKERS IN INDUSTRIES COVERED BY
STRONG UNIONS WILL INCREASE DISPROPORTIONATELY TO THOSE OF
WORKERS WHO RELY ENTIRELY ON THE COMMISSION FOR WAGE MOVEMENTS.
THE IDEA OF WIDENING THE WAGE NEGOTIATING PROCESS WHICH TAKES
PLACE IN SUCH INDUSTRIES AS THE METAL TRADES ON AN ANNUAL BASIS
TO INCLUDE ALL SECTORS OF INDUSTRY IS, IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
VIEW, A GOOD ONE IF IT CAN BE ACHIEVED. 



EMBARGO: 8.30 PM
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G, WHITL4M, QC, M, P,,
TO TH! E ' NATIONAL RURAL PRESS CLUB DINNER, AT THE LAKESIDE
INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBER. RA
4I JULY 13/ 4
ON THE 14 DECEMBER LAST YEAR I WROTE TO DR STUART
HARRIS AND ESTABLISHED A WORKING GROUP ON RURAL POLICY IN
AUSTRALIA, IN THAT LETTER I SAID:
" I ENVISAGE THAT YOUR GREEN PAPER WILL BE
PUBLISHED WITH THE AUTHORITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT BUT WITHOUT FORMAL APPROVAL.
IN THAT FORM I HOPE IT WILL PROVIDE A BASIS
FOR WIDESPREAD DIALOGUE IN THE PARLIAMENT,
IN RURAL ORGANISATIONS AND IN THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY. I
THE DIALOGUE TO WHICH I THEN REFERRED HAS NOW
BEGUN. IAM GRATEFUL, MR CHAIRMAN4 FOR THE OPPORTUNITY YOUR
INVITATION HAS GIVEN ME TO PARTICIPATE IN THAT DIALOGUE. 
4
-2-
AN IMPORTANT OPPORTUNITY FOR MEANINGFUL DIALOGUE
HAS BEEN CREATED BY SENATOR KEN WRIEDT, WHO WILL NOW MORE
APPROPRIATELY BE KNOWN AS THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE,
HIs INITIATIVE TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE FARMING COMMUNITY WAS THE
CONVENING OF THE RURAL FORUM, THE FIRST OCCASION ON WHICH
ANY GOVERNMENT HAS INVITED ALL MULTI-PURPOSE FARMING
ORGANISATIONS TO DISCUSS THE PROBLEMS OF THE INDUSTRY WITH
GOVERNMENT, THIS FORUM WILL NOW BE AN ANNUAL EVENT, I AM
PLEASED THE SECOND MEETING TO BE HELD TOMORROW HAS BEFORE
IT SO WIDE-RANGING AND CONSTRUCTIVE A DOCUMENT AS THE
GREEN PAPER ON RURAL POLICY,
FEW OF MY MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENTS HAVE GIVEN
ME AS MUCH REAL SATISFACTION AS THAT OF SENATOR KEN WRIEDT,
HIS SINCERITY, ABILITY AND COMMITMENT HAVE RECEIVED
CONGRATULATIONS FROM MANY QUARTERS, I UNDERSTAND THAT HE
NOW KNOWS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A CORRIEDALE AND A
MERINO: INDEED, WHEN IT COMES TO HAVING AN EFFECTIVE
MINISTER, I BELIEVE TO COIN A PHRASE YOU HAVE NEVER
HAD IT SO GOOD, ,/ 3 
-3-
THE GREEN PAPER WHICH WILL BE DISCUSSED AT THE
RURAL FORUM TOMORROW IS THE FIRST COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT
OF AUSTRALIAN RURAL POLICY FOR OVER 20 YEARS. I BELIEVE
THAT ALL OF US WHETHER IN GOVERNMENT OR IN RURAL INDUSTRY,
ARE INDEBTED TO THE MEMBERS OF THIS WORKING GROUP AND WILL
REMAIN SO INDEBTED FOR MANY YEARS TO COME. THE REPORT
IS INDEED A SENSITIVE AND INTELLIGENT DISCUSSION OF THE
PROBLEMS FACED BY RURAL INDUSTRIES AND OF THE PRINCIPLES
WHICH SHOULD GUIDE GOVERNMENT ACTION IN MEETING THOSE
PROBLEMS. BEARING IN MIND THE VERY SHORT TIME IN WHICH
THIS REPORT WAS WRITTEN THE JOB DONE BY THE PEOPLE INVOLVED
IS TRULY QUITE EXTRAORDINARY.
THE OBJECTIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT IN REQUESTING A
GREEN PAPER INDICATES OUR GENERAL APPROACH TO THE MAKING
OF DECISIONS IN THE RURAL SECTOR AND INDEED FOR OTHER
INDUSTRIES. IT SHOWS THE WAY A LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL MAKE
DECISIONS AFTER FULL PUBLIC ENQUIRY AND FREE PUBLIC DEBATE.
WE HAVE ESTABLISHED THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION,
WHICH IS THE FIRST INDEPENDENT BODY TO INQUIRE INTO, ASSESS
AND REPORT UPON ALL REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE. AS YOU WOULD
BE AWARE, THE REPORTS OF THE COMMISSION ARE NOW GENERALLY
PUBLISHED BEFORE THE GOVERNMENT MAKES ITS DECISION SO THAT
MEANINGFUL PUBLIC DEBATE CAN OCCUR. i ,/ 4 
-4IPERHAPS
EVEN MORE THAN OTHER SECTORS I BELIEVE
THAT THE IMAGE OF RURAL INDUSTRIES HAS SUFFERED BY THE
ARROGANT ATTITUDES OF SOME POLITICANS, AND, IF I MAY BE
PERMITTED A SOMEWHAT PARTISAN NOTE, OF ONE PARTICULAR
POLITICAL PARTY, THEY OFTEN MAKE THE ASSUMPTION THAT
RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE A RIGHT TO RECEIVE ASSISTANCE
WITHOUT PUBLIC INQUIRY AND JUSTIFICATION, THE PROCESS OF
DECISION-MAKING OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT EXEMPLIFIED IN
THE NEW ROLE OF THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
AND IN THE PUBLICATION OF THIS GREEN PAPER WILL ASSIST
IN BREAKING DOWN THE BELIEF OFTEN THE MISCONCEPTION
OF MANY URBAN RESIDENTS THAT RURAL INDUSTRIES RECEIVE
UNFAIR PRIVILEGES AT THE TAXPAYERS' EXPENSE.
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ARE CAPABLE OF JUDGING
WHETHER OR NOT A GOOD CASE FOR ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN
PRESENTED AND AS TAXPAYERS THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO RECEIVE
IT. THE REPRESENTATIVES OF RURAL INDUSTRIES HAVE IN THE
PAST UNDERESTIMATED THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATING THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ABOUT THEIR PROBLEMS AND OF CONVINCING
THEM WHENEVER REQUESTS FOR ASSISTANCE ARE MADE. THE
PUBLICATION OF THIS GREEN PAPER WILL GO A LONG WAY IN
EDUCATING THE BROADER PUBLIC, INCLUDING ECONOMISTS, ABOUT
SOME OF THE SPECIAL PROBLEMS FACING RURAL INDUSTRY, PROBLEMS
WHICH INVOLVE GOVERNMENT POLICY. 1 11/ 5 
WHILST I WOULD NOT PURPORT TO SUMMARISE THE GREEN
PAPER ITSELF I WOULD LIKE TO HIGHLIGHT SOME ASPECTS OF THE
REPORT WHICH I BELIEVE TO BE OF PARTICULAR SIGNIFICANCE.
FIRST IS THE MANNER IN WHICH THE REPORT EMPHASISES THAT A
NATIONAL RURAL POLICY IS AN INTEGRAL PART OF A NATIONAL
ECONOMIC POLICY AND THAT IT MUST BE JUDGED IN TERMS OF ITS
CONTRIBUTION TO NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL OBJECTIVES.
MANY OF THE REPORT'S MORE SPECIFIC COMMENTS ARE IN FACT
CONCERNED WITH THESE BROADER NATIONAL OBJECTIVES. MUCH OF
ITS VALUE DERIVES FROM ITS ASSESSMENT OF PARTICULAR PROBLEMS
AND PROPOSALS MEASURED BY THE STANDARD OF NATIONAL GOALS OF
EFFICIENCY, OF WELFARE AND OF EQUALITY.
ONE SUCH CONSIDERATION WHICH THE WORKING GROUP
IDENTIFIES IS THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS. THE REPORT NOTES
" THE POSITION OF THE CONSUMER IS PROPERLY BEING GIVEN
GREATER CONSIDERATION THAN IN THE PAST". THIS PERSPECTIVE
WILL ENHANCE THE VALUE OF THIS REPORT IN PROMOTING A WIDER
UNDERSTANDING OF RURAL POLICIES. THE WORKING GROUP
CORRECTLY NOTES THAT THE QUITE ABSURD RESTRICTIONS UPON
MARGARINE HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED " THE IMAGE" OF ALL RURAL
PRODUCERS. MANY URBAN RESIDENTS WHO ARE AWARE OF THESE
RESTRICTIONS WOULD REGARD THEM AS TYPICAL RATHER THAN AS
THE ABERRATION THEY IN FACT ARE. IF IN OUR DELIBERATIONS
WE CONTINUE TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS,
AS THE REPORT RECOMMENDS, THEN I BELIEVE WE WILL ENSURE THE
BROAD ACCEPTABILITY OF THE DECISIONS WHICH WE MAKE. is 1/ 6 
-6-
THE GREEN PAPER CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE MARKET
AS THE MOST EFFECTIVE METHOD OF ALLOCATING PRODUCTIVE
SOURCES IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR. IT ALSO RECOGNISES
HOWEVER, THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS A PROPER ROLE TO
INTERVENE IN THE OPERATION OF THE MARKET, PARTLY TO IMPROVE
THE MANNER IN WHICH THE MARKET OPERATES AND PARTLY TO
COMPENSATE FOR ITS, AT TIMES, HARSH CONSEQUENCES. IN
MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISIONS I BELIEVE IT IS TRUE
THAT WE HAVE ACCEPTED THE PRIMACY OF THE MARKET TO A GREATER
EXTENT THAN SOME THOUGHT OR FEARED POSSIBLE. IT IS
USEFUL TO HAVE THE BASIC PRINCIPLE EMPHASISED IN THE MANNER
THAT IT HAS BEEN BY THE WORKING GROUP,
I WOULD NOW LIKE TO DISCUSS SOME OF THE PRINCIPLES
OUTLINED IN THE REPORT.
ONE OF THE OUTSTANDING ANALYSES IN THIS DOCUMENT
IS THE DISCUSSION OF UNCERTAINTY AND INSTABILITY IN RURAL
INDUSTRY. THE RESEARCH UNDERTAKEN FOR THE WORKING GROUP
SHOWS THAT FLUCTUATIONS IN BOTH PRICE AND OUTPUT ARE
TYPICALLY GREATER FOR AGRICULTURE THAN FOR OTHER INDUSTRIES.
A SURVEY CONDUCTED FOR THE WORKING GROUP BY THE COMMISSIONER
FOR TAXATION SHOWED THAT OVER 40 PER CENT HAD FLUCTUATIONS OF
PER CENT OR MORE IN THEIR YEAR-TO-YEAR INCOMES COMPARED
WITH NO MORE THAN 23 PER CENT FOR OTHER BUSINESS AND
1/ PER CENT FOR WAGE EARNERS. I 
-7-
IN CASE SOME OF YOU MAY BELIEVE THAT THIS IS A
NEW REVELATION FOR ME MAY I QUOTE FROM A SPEECH I DELIVERED
AT A DINNER FOR THE AUSTRALIAN FARMERS' FEDERATION IN
OCTOBER OF LAST YEAR. I SAID THEN, " THE CHIEF CHARACTERISTIC
OF YOUR INDUSTRY, WHATEVER GOVERNMENT IS IN POWER, IS ITS
VULNERABILITY. MORE THAN ANY OTHER SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY YOU
ARE SUBJECT TO UNPREDICTABLE AND IMPONDERABLE CIRCUMSTANCES.
YOU ARE AT THE MERCY OF THE SEASONS, AT THE MERCY OF WORLD
CURRENCY RELIGNMENTS, OF FLUCTUATING INTERNATIONAL MARKETS,
GLUTS AND SHORTAGES.", THE DETAILED TREATMENT OF THIS MOST
SIGNIFICANT ASPECT OF RURAL INDUSTRY PRESENTED IN THE GREEN
PAPER WILL SURELY PROVE TO BE ONE OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
PRACTICAL MATTERS FLOWING FROM OUR CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT.
I AM SURE THAT IT WILL BE A FEATURE OF YOUR DISCUSSIONS TOMORROW.
THE REPORT DISCUSSES THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN
PROVIDING PROTECTIVE SERVICES FOR THE INDUSTRY SUCH AS
QUARANTINE, RESEARCH AND EXTENSION AND IN IMPROVING THE
BARGAINING POWER OF INDIVIDUAL PRODUCERS THROUGH MARKETING
SCHEMES AND THE PROMOTION OF CO-OPERATIVES. FURTHER, THE
REPORT CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE SPECIAL ROLE A GOVERNMENT HAS
IN ASSISTING OUR AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRIES TO ADJUST TO ECONOMIC
CHANGES. WE HAVE RECENTLY RECObNISED THE PROBLEMS OF STRUCTURAL
ADJUSTMENT IN OTHER INDUSTRIES AS REQUIRING COMPREHENSIVE
GOVERNMENT ATTENTION AND HAVE MADE SPECIAL PROVISION FOR COUNTRY
TOWNS WHICH DEPEND TO A SIGNIFICANT EXTENT ON A SINGLE FIRM.
THE COMMENTS IN THE GREEN PAPER WILL ASSIST US IN THE FURTHER
DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAMS. ./ 8 
ONE SECTION OF THE REPORT HAS RECEIVED RELATIVELY
LITTLE ATTENTION TO DATE. IT IS THE CHAPTER CONCERNING THE
WELFARE OF RURAL PEOPLE, THE WORKING GROUP ACKNOWLEDGES THE
BREVITY OF ITS EXAMINATION OF THE PROVISION OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
IN RURAL AREAS. THE REPORT ASSISTS US IN MOVING AWAY FROM
WHAT MIGHT BE TERMED AN INCOMES MENTALITY. So MANY OF THE NEEDS
OF OUR CITIZENS AND THE PROVISION OF ADEQUATE SERVICES MUST
DEPEND ON BROAD COMMUNITY ACTION AND THAT MEANS GOVERNMENT
ACTION. THE CONCERN OF THE WORKING GROUP TO EXPAND THE SCOPE
AND VARIETY OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR PEOPLE WHO CHOOSE TO LIVE
IN RURAL AREAS WILL AFFECT THE GOVERNMENT'S CONSIDERATION OF
THE MORE DETAILED REPORTS WE SHALL RECEIVE ON POVERTY,
EDUCATION, HEALTH AND THE PROVISION OF WELFARE SERVICES.
I TRUST THIS ASPECT OF THE REPORT WILL NOT BE LOST IN YOUR
CONSIDERATION OF WHAT SOME WOULD REGARD AS THE MORE PRACTICAL
ASPECTS OF RURAL POLICY.
IT WOULD BE REMISS OF ME NOT TO MAKE SOME COMMENT ON
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GREEN PAPER AND THE MANY DECISIONS
WE HAVE ALREADY TAKEN IN RELATION TO RURAL POLICY. PERHAPS I
SHOULD BEGIN BY ACCEPTING THE COMMENTS IN THE GREEN PAPER ON
THE DIFFICULTY OF COMMUNICATION WITH PEOPLE IN RURAL AREAS.
THIS DIFFICULTY IS OF COURSE ACCENTUATED IN THE HEAT OF AN
ELECTION CAMPAIGN. I NOW COME TO SPEAK TO YOU AT THE ONLY TIME
WHEN A POLITICIAN CAN AFFORD TO BE BIPARTISAN IMMEDIATELY AFTER
AN ELECTION. I BELIEVE THAT MUCH OF THE CRITICISM AND INDEED
VILIFICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN UNWARRANTED. MUCH HAS
BEEN POLITICALLY MOTIVATED AND I HAVE BEEN IN POLITICS TOO LONG
NOT TO ACCEPT THAT AS PART OF THE GAME. NEVERTHELESS THE PUBLICATION
OF THIS GREEN PAPER ENABLES US TO PLACE THE GOVERNMENT'S PAST
DECISIONS IN THEIR PROPER PERSPECTIVE. 
THE WORKING GROUP MAKES FREQUENT REFERENCE TO
CONCESSIONS AND SUBSIDIES WHICH ARE OF GREATEST ADVANTAGE TO THE
MORE WEALTHY PRIMARY PRODUCERS. MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S DECISIONS
WHICH HAVE BEEN MOST SEVERELY CRITICISED RELATED TO CONCESSIONS
AND SUBSIDIES OF THIS NATURE. THEY HAD BEEN INTRODUCED AT A TIME
WHEN THE PREOCCUPATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO
INCREASE PRODUCTION TO EARN FOREIGN EXCHANGE. THAT TIME HAS
PASSED. THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE IGNORE THE VITAL IMPORTANCE
OF ECONOMICALLY HEALTHY AND EFFICIENT INDUSTRIES, INDUSTRIES
WHICH DESPITE ALL THE ATTENTION GIVEN TO MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
STILL PROVIDE OVER HALF OF OUR EXPORTS, IT SIMPLY MEANS THAT
IT NO LONGER PAYS US AS A NATION TO DEVELOP FARMS MORE RAPIDLY
THAN IT WOULD PAY YOU YOURSELVES TO DEVELOP THEM. POLICIES OF
THIS KIND ONLY EXACERBATE THE PROBLEMS OF MATCHING SUPPLY AND
DEMAND. I AM ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF THE FACT THAT MANY OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S POSITIVE POLICIES DO NOT HAVE THE SAME OBVIOUS
IMPACT ON THE FARMER AS HAS THE WITHDRAWAL OF SOME CONCESSIONS.
ONE EXAMPLE IS OUR DECISION TO ESTABLISH AN ANIMAL HEALTH
LABORATORY TO PROTECT OUR LIVESTOCK INDUSTRY FROM FOOT AND MOUTH
AND OTHER EXOTIC DISEASES. IT WILL COST $ 56 MILLION
APPROXIMATELY THE ANNUAL COST OF THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY
YET THE BENEFITS TO RURAL PRODUCERS WILL BE INFINITELY GREATER.
THEY MAY NOT BE REFLECTED IN TERMS OF MONEY IN THE POCKET, BUT
THE INTRODUCTION OF THE DISEASES WHICH THE LABORATORY IS DESIGNED
TO PREVENT WOULD WIPE OUT $ 2,000 MILLION IN EXPORT TRADE
OVERNIGHT, 
ANOTHER CLEAR EXAMPLE OF THE WAY THE GOVERNMENT'S
POLICIES HAVE ASSISTED PRIMARY PRODUCERS INDIRECTLY IS THE
TARIFF CUT, THE VALUE OF THIS IS HIGHLIGHTED BY THE GREEN
PAPER'S ADOPTION OF A TARIFF COMPENSATION ARGUMENT FOR RURAL
CONCESSIONS. I NOTE WITH SOME PLEASURE THE EXTREMELY FAVOURABLE
COMMENTS MADE BY THE WORKING GROUP ON THE GOVERNMENT'S EXCHANGE
RATE AND TARIFF POLICIES, THE VALUE OF THE TARIFF CUT IS LESS
TANGIBLE, LESS IMMEDIATE AND LESS DIRECT THAN THE CONCESSIONS
WHICH WE HAVE REMOVED, I SUPPOSE THAT WE ALL COME TO BELIEVE
THAT WE DESERVE WHAT WE ARE USED TO RECEIVING, CIRCUMSTANCES
CHANGE AND PRIORITIES CHANGE: A GOVERNMENT IS NOT BEING
" ANTI-RURAL" IF IT RECOGNISES THAT,
IT IS ALSO POSSIBLE NOW TO ASSESS THAT OTHER REPORT
WHICH HAS RECEIVED SO MUCH ATTENTION IN RURAL AREAS, THE
REPORT OF THE COOMBS TASK FORCE, THAT REPORT REPRESENTED A
CLEARING OF THE DECKS TO MAKE ROOM FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S OWN
PRIORITIES AND TO GET RID OF THE ACCUMULATED DEADWOOD OF YEARS
OF AD HOC DECISION-MAKING, WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SEEKS
IS A NATIONAL RURAL POLICY BASED ON SUSTAINABLE PRINCIPLES, PRINCIPLES
THAT ALL AUSTRALIANS CAN ACCEPT, THE GREEN PAPER PROVIDES US
WITH SUCH A SET OF PRINCIPLES, ITS CONVENOR, DR STUART HARRIS,
WAS, I SHOULD NOTE IN PASSING, A MEMBER OF THE COOMBS TASK FORCE,
HE HAS PRODUCED A DOCUMENT WHICH I BELIEVE WILL PLACE AUSTRALIAN
RURAL POLICY ON A MORE SOUND, MORE ACCEPTABLE AND MORE PERMANENT
BASIS, THAT BASIS IS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THE APPROACH ADOPTED
BY THE EARLIER TASK FORCE OF WHICH HE WAS A MEMBER, , Il 
I SHOULD PERHAPS REFER TO TWO ITEMS UPON WHICH THE
COOMBS TASK FORCE REPORTED BUT UPON WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED
NOT TO ACT, DROUGHT BONDS AND THE AVERAGING PROVISIONS OF THE
INCOME TAX LEGISLATION, THE GREEN PAPER REPEATS MANY OF THE
CRITICISMS OF THE AVERAGING PROVISIONS, IT RECOGNISES, HOWEVER,
AS THE GOVERNMENT DID, THAT THEY ARE AMONGST THE FEW EXISTING
MEASURES DIRECTLY ALLEVIATING THE PROBLEM OF INCOME INSTABILITY
FOR PRIMARY PRODUCERS, NOT A SUBSIDY BUT A RECOGNITION OF THE
SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES OF RURAL PRODUCTION, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
NOW CONSIDER THE RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE GREEN PAPER WHICH SEEK
TO REFORM AND SYSTEMATISE OUR TREATMENT OF THIS PECULIAR
CHARACTERISTIC OF YOUR INDUSTRY,
IN THIS RESPECT MAY I MAKE ONE ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATION
FOR DEBATE, THE GREEN PAPER NOTES THAT, GENERALLY SPEAKING,
ALL RISK CROP INSURANCE IS NOT AVAILABLE IN AUSTRALIA, THE RECENT
FLOODS IN SOME PARTS OF OUR COUNTRY HAVE EMPHASISED THIS GAP,
AS YOU WOULD BE AWARE, WE INTEND TO ESTABLISH AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE, PERHAPS YOU COULD CONSIDER IN
YOUR DELIBERATIONS TOMORROW WHETHER THIS NEW INSTITUTION SHOULD
ESTABLISH A FACILITY OF THE KIND DISCUSSED IN THE REPORT,
THE ARGUMENT IS OFTEN ADVANCED THAT PEOPLE IN RURAL
AREAS SUFFER FROM SEVERE COST OF LIVING DISADVANTAGES FOR WHICH
THEY SHOULD RECEIVE COMPENSATION, OUR POLICIES ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHARGES AND ON THE PETROLEUM PRICE SUBSIDY SCHEME HAVE BEEN
CRITICISED FROM THIS POINT OF VIEW, I THEREFORE READ WITH
PARTICULAR INTEREST THE COMMENTS ON THIS MATTER IN THE GREEN PAPER,
THE WORKING GROUP STATES THAT THE ARGUMENT THAT PEOPLE IN RURAL
AREAS SUFFER COST OF LIVING DISABILITIES IS NOT PROVEN, THEY
HIGHLIGHT THE VALUE IN TERMS OF LIVING STANDARDS OF THE LOWER LAND
PRICES AND THE % M4L= ER NEFD FOR FXPENDITURE ON TRAVEL_ TO AND F WORK, 
12.
THE REAL DISABILITY LIES IN THE AREAS OF PUBLIC
SERVICES, THE GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH HAS RECOGNISED THIS FACTS
ONE OF OUR EARLIEST DECISIONS WAS TO ESTABLISH THE SPECIAL
ALLOWANCES FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN. I DO NOT NEED TO REPEAT THE
HIGH PRIORITY THAT THE GOVERNMENT ATTACHES TO EDUCATION, WE ARE
DETERMINED TO SEE THAT INEQUALITIES IN OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM ARE
ABOLISHED INCLUDING INEQUALITIES WHICH ARISE FROM GEOGRAPHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS. THERE ARE, OF COURSE, OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES WHICH
REQUIRE HEAVY SUBSIDIES, IT IS A BASIC QUESTION OF PRIORITIES TO
DECIDE WHICH SHOULD BE SUBSIDISED, THE SUBSTANTIAL LOSSES ON
RURAL PASSENGER SERVICES OF STATE RAILWAYS CAN IMPOSE INTOLERABLE
BURDENS ON GOVERNMENT FINANCES. WE HAVE FACED DECISIONS ON SUCH
PRIORITIES. THE RURAL CRITICS OF THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD KNOW
THAT IT COSTS UP TO $ 20,000 PER CONNECTION TO PROVIDE AUTOMATIC
TELEPHONE SERVICES IN AREAS WITH LESS THAN 200 TELEPHONES, TEN
TIMES MORE THAN IN THE CAPITAL CITIES. YET OUR MUCH CRITICISED
DECISION TO INCREASE TELEPHONE RENTALS FOR NON-METROPOLITAN
SUBSCRIBERS WILL REDUCE THE OPERATING LOSSES OF $ 100 MILLION IN
19/ 1-72 ON COUNTRY POSTAL AND TELECOMMUNICATION CHARGES BY ABOUT
$ 18 MILLION PER ANNUM. THIS DECISION SHOULD BE CONTRASTED WITH
THE ISOLATED CHILDREN ALLOWANCES. WE ARE A GOVERNMENT COMMITTED
TO IMPROVEMENTS IN HEALTH, EDUCATION AND WELFARE. THIS IS A
MATTER OF PRIORITIES; IT IS NOT A MATTER OF ANTI-RURAL BIAS,
PEOPLE MAY CRITICISE OUR PRIORITIES, THAT IS THEIR RIGHT, As
LONG AS THE DEBATE ABOUT OUR ATTITUDE TO RURAL COMMUNITIES IS
CONDUCTED IN THOSE TERMS I WILL BE HAPPY TO PUT OUR CASE. ,/ 13 
13,
NOTHING HOWEVER, EXASPERATES ME MORE THAN THE BASELESS
ACCUSATION THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY OR THAT I AM
PRIMARILY CONCERNED WITH THE CITIES, LABOR IS NEITHER AN URBAN
NOR A RURAL PARTY, WE ARE A NATIONAL PARTY GUIDED BY NATIONAL
CONSIDERATIONS, OF COURSE WE MUST BE CONCERNED WITH THE PLACES
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE, PARTICULARLY AS THE GENERAL ISSUE
OF THE CITIES HAD BEEN IGNORED IN AUSTRALIAN POLITICS UNTIL WE
MADE IT AN ISSUE, THAT DOES NOT DETRACT FROM MY CONCERN, OR
MY PARTY'S CONCERN, FOR THE PROBLEMS AND NEEDS OF RURAL COMMUNITIES,
NOW THAT THE ELECTION IS OVER, LET US STOP THESE
BASELESS ACCUSATIONS, LET US RENEW THE DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE WHOM YOU REPRESENT, I COULD NOT
THINK OF A MORE PROPER BASIS FOR THIS DIALOGUE THAN THE
EXCELLENT GREEN PAPER WHICH YOU WILL DISCUSS TOMORROW,
L W 



EMBARGO: 8. 30 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE GOVERNORGENERAL'S
DINNER, TUESDAY 9 JULY 74
SIR PAUL HASLUCK'S LONG AND REMARKABLE CAREER
HAS BEEN LANDMARKED BY AN EXTRAORDINARY NUMBER OF " FIRSTS",
TO OPEN A PARLIAMENT AND FAREWELL IT ON THE SAME DAY
IS A RECORD LIKELY TO STAND FOR A VERY LONG TIME.
THIS OCCASION IS ABOVE ALL A PARLIAMENTARY OCCASION.
WE FAREWELL A FORMER COLLEAGUE OF 20 YEARS.
THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, HOWEVER, IS A CONSTITUENT PART
OF A PARLIAMENT WHICH CONSISTS OF THE QUEEN, THE SENATE
AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. AS THE QUEEN'S
REPRESENTATIVE IN AUSTRALIA, HIS EXCELLENCY IS PART
OF THIS PARLIAMENT, So IT IS DOUBLY FITTING THAT
THIS MEMORABLE DAY IN THE LIFE OF THE PARLIAMENT
AND, I TRUST, A MEMORABLE DAY CROWNING A VERY
MEMORABLE CAREER SHOULD END HERE. 
-2-
AND A GREAT CAREER IT HAS BEEN INDEED
A CAREER OF HIGH ACCOMPLISHMENT BY A MOST HIGHLY
ACCOMPLISHED AUSTRALIAN, THE LIST IS EXTRAORDINARY
JOURNALIST, AUTHOR, HISTORIAN, ACADEMIC, CIVIL
SERVANT, DIPLOMATIST, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT,
MINISTER OF THE CROWN, VICEROY-A CAREER
REMARKABLE IN ITS DIVERSITY, YET EQUALLY REMARKABLE
IN ITS CONSISTENCY, THERE HAS NOT BEEN A PRO-CONSUL
OF MORE DIVERSE ATTAINMENT SINCE CICERO.
THIS SHINING CAREER HAS ONE CLEAR, CONSISTENT THEME,
THE SERVICE OF AUSTRALIA AND THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA,
IN ONE CAPACITY OR ANOTHER, HE HAS BEEN IN THE SERVICE
OF THE CROWN AND THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE
FOR AN UNINTERRUPTED THIRTY-FIVE YEARS,
IN THE BRIEF PERIODS WHEN HE WAS NOT HELPING TO MAKE
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY, HE WAS TEACHING IT OR WRITING IT,
AND NO LESS REMARKABLE, LADY HASLUCK,
AN HISTORIAN IN HER OWN RIGHT, OF ELEGANCE AND
CHARM IN HER WRITING AND HER PERSON ALIKE, 
-3-
AROUND THIS ROOM ARE SCORES OF MEN AND
WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN CLOSELY ASSOCIATED WITH HIS
EXCELLENCY IN VARIOUS PERIODS OF HIS CAREER, WHO
HAVE WORKED WITH HIM OR WORKED UNDER HIM.
THERE ARE THOSE OF US WHO WERE HIS PARLIAMENTARY
COLLEAGUES, MANY OF THEM. HIS FORMER MINISTERIAL
COLLEAGUES. THERE ARE PUBLIC SERVANTS WHO SERVED
HIM AS MINISTER, AND THERE ARE PUBLIC SERVANTS
WHO WERE HIS COLLEAGUES WHEN HE TOO, WAS A PUBLIC
SERVANT. I MIGHT BE FORGIVEN IF I SINGLE OUT
FOR MENTION THOSE WHO WERE ASSOCIATED WITH HIM ON
A UNIQUE OCCASION OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO THIS NATION.
HE WAS THE FIRST PERSON TO PRESENT CREDENTIALS
TO THE FIRST SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED HATIONS, 
His COLLEAGUES IN NEW YORK WERE MR. ARTHUR TANGE, fiR.
JOHN MOORE, MR. ALAN RENOUF AND MISS JULIA DRAKE-BROCKMAN.
SIR ARTHUR TANGE HAS BECOME SECRETARY OF THE DEFENCE DEPARTMENT,
fiR, JUSTICE MOORE HAS BECOME PRESIDENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION, MR. RENOUF HAS BECOME
SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, AND MISS
DRAKE-BROCKMAN HAS BECOME MRS.' MOORE. OUR FIRST PERMANENT
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS IS ASSEMBLED HERE AGAIN TONIGHT
TO FAREWELL ITS CHIEF,
HIs EXCELLENCY HAD THE UNIQUE EXPERIENCE OF COMING TO
HEAD AS MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, THE DEPARTMENT IN WHICH
HE HAD SERVED.
THERE IS A NICE SYMMETRY ABOUT HIS EXECUTIVE CAREER.
AS HE HIMSELF RECORDS IN THE PREFACE TO THE SECOND VOLUME
OF HIS WAR HISTORY, HIS PROMOTION TO THE MINISTRY WAS HASTENED
BY THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION OF 1951; HIS LAST FORMAL DUTY WAS TO OPEN
A PARLIAMENT WHICH WAS CREATED THROUGH A DOUBLE DISSOLUTION WHICH
HE HIMSELF HAD GRANTED. HE DID NOT ATTAIN THE PRIME MINISTERSHIP,
BUT WITHOUT IN ANY WAY DEROGATING FROM THE DISTINGUISHED CANDIDATES
WHO SOUGHT THE LEADERSHIPOF THE LIBERAL PARTY AFTER THE TRAGIC
EVENT OF DECEMBER 1967, IT IS NO SECRET TH. AT AT THE TIME I WOULD
HAVE REGARDED PAUL HASLUCK AS THE MOST FORMIDABLE OPPONENT,
I AM NOT SAYING THAT WE WOULD HAVE LOST THE ELECTIONS IN 1972,
BUT PERHAPS WE MIGHT NOT HAVE WON, 
HOWEVER THAT MAY BE, HE DID COME TO HEAD
ONE OF THE MOST EFFECTIVE AND EXPEDITIOUS EXECUTIVE
COUNCILS WE HAVE EVER HAD, IT WAS A HAPPY, HARMONIOUS,
HEADY TRIUMVIRATE. FOR THOSE TWO WEEKS IN DECEMBER, 1972,
THERE WAS TOTAL PRIVATE AND PUBLIC UNANIMITY AMONG ALL
TWENTY-SEVEN MINISTRIES, AND IN THOSE DAYS WE STRUCK
AN ACCORD WITH THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL WHICH HAS REMAINED
UNMARREDI UNDIMINISHED, HIS GOVERNOR-GENERALSHIP, THE CIRCUMSTANCES
IN WHICH HE WAS PLACED AS GOVERNOR-GENERAL,
CONFIRM CONCLUSIVELY, IF CONFIRMATION WERE NEEDED,
THREE GREAT TRUTHS: THE ABSOLUTE FITNESS OF APPOINTING
AUSTRALIANS TO AUSTRALIAIS HIGHEST POSITION, THE
ABSOLUTE FITNESS OF POLITICIANS TO HOLD THAT OFFICE
AND THE ABSOLUTE ABILITY OF OPPOSING POLITICIANS TO
BURY PARTISANSHIP IN THE SERVICE OF THE NATION, 
-6-
SIR PAUL HASLUCK'S CAREER IS ITSELF A
TRIBUTE TO THE BASIC STRENGTH AND STABILITY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM WHICH HE SERVED FOR
SO LONG WITH SUCH FIDELITY, AT A TIME WHEN
PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY IS EVERYWHERE UNDERGOING
TREMENDOUS STRESSES WHICH CHALLENGE ITS BASIC ASSUMPTIONS,
WHICH CHALLENGE ITS VERY SURVIVAL, IT IS GOOD TO BE
REMINDED OF THE TRUE SOURCES OF ITS STRENGTH AND
TO HAVE IN THE PERSON AND CAREER OF OUR OWN GOVERNORGENERAL,
A POWERFUL, LIVING REMINDER OF THE HUMAN
QUALITIES BY WHICH ALONE THAT STRENGTH CAN BE
MAINTAINED, 



EMBARGO: 8.30PM FRIDAY 12 JULY 1974
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
TO THE AUSTRALASIAN INSTITUTE OF MINING AND METALLURGYI
HOMESTEAD HOTEL, BRISBANE, 12 JULY 1974
THE OBJECTS OF YOUR INSTITUTE WERE DEFINED
IN THESE TERMS 81 YEARS AGO:
" TO PROMOTE THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
CONNECTED WITH THE ECONOMICAL PRODUCTION
OF THE USEFUL MINERALS AND METALS, AND
THE WELFARE OF THOSE IN THESE INDUSTRIES,
BY MEANS OF MEETINGS FOR SOCIAL INTERCOURSE,
AND THE READING AND DISCUSSION OF
PROFESSIONAL PAPERS, AND TO CIRCULATE BY
MEANS OF PUBLICATIONS AMONGST ITS MEMBERS
AND ASSOCIATES, THE INFORMATION THUS
OBTAINED." 
-2-
IT IS TO THAT SPIRIT OF PROFESSIONAL
DETACHMENT, OF SCHOLARLY CONCERN, THAT I HOPE TO
APPEAL IN ADDRESSING YOU TONIGHT, I TRUST THAT
YOUR PROFESSIONAL TRAINING AND GOOD JUDGEMENT
WILL LEAD YOU TO THE SAME CONCLUSIONS, THE SAME
CONSIDERATIONS OF NATIONAL INTEREST, THAT HAVE
GUIDED THE GOVERNMENT IN FRAMING ITS POLICIES
TOWARDS OUR GREAT MINING INDUSTRIES, I KNOW
THAT MEN SUCH AS YOU, MEN WHOSE SKILLS AND LEARNING
AND DEDICATION HAVE HELPED CREATE THESE INDUSTRIES
AND LEAD THEM TO PROSPERITY, WILL WANT TO SEE
THEM PRESERVED AND STRENGTHENED AND KEPT AS FAR
AS POSSIBLE IN AUSTRALIAN HANDS, I BELIEVE YOU
HAVE AS GREAT AN INTEREST AS I DO IN FOSTERING
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THESE INDUSTRIES, I BELIEVE
YOU WILL ACKNOWLEDGE THE URGENT ENVIRONMENTAL
PROBLEMS CREATED BY MINING IN A WORLD WHOSE
RESOURCES ARE FINITE, I BELIEVE YOU WILL RECOGNISE
THAT THE CLAIMS OF OUR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE FOR LAND
RIGHTS AFFECT ALL AUSTRALIANS, BUT HAVE A SPECIAL
RELEVANCE TO THE MINING INDUSTRY, I BELIEVE, TOO,
THAT AS CONCERNED PROFESSIONAL MEN, YOU WILL
ACKNOWLEDGE THE DUTY OF MODERN GOVERNMENTS TO
HUSBAND NATIONAL RESOURCES AND ENSURE THAT OUR
MINERALS ARE SOLD AT FAIR PRICES ON WORLD MARKETS, 
-3-
SOON AFTER WE CAME TO OFFICE LAST YEAR,
THE GOVERNMENT RESOLVED TO EXERCISE ITS
CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE EXPORT
OF OUR RAW AND SEMI-PROCESSED MINERALS.
WE DID THIS TO ACHIEVE A REASONABLE LEVEL
OF EXPORT PRICES AND A BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF AUSTRALIAN MINERAL RESOURCES. OUR POLICIES
ASSERT THE AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN THE DEVELOPMENT AND
MARKETING OF AUSTRALIA'S MINERALS. WE ARE
TAKING THIS COURSE, NOT IN ANY DOCTRINAIRE
SPIRIT, BUT FROM A RECOGNITION OF THE PRACTICAL
AND INESCAPABLE REALITIES OF WORLD TRADE.
THE EXPLOITATION AND MARKETING OF MINERAL
RESOURCES IS NOT MERELY A NATIONAL CONCERN, BUT AN
INTERNATIONAL CONCERN. IT IS CERTAINLY MORE THAN A
STATE CONCERN. MANY OF THE CORPORATIONS WITH WHICH
WE ALL HAVE TO DEAL HAVE BUDGETS SEVERAL TIMES THAT
OF THE STATE OF QUEENSLAND. THE ONLY GOVERNMENT IN
AUSTRALIA THAT CAN DEAL WITH THESE LARGE CORPORATIONS
IS THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. THE ONLY GOVERNMENT IN
AUSTRALIA WITH INTERNATIONAL STANDING AND RECOGNITION
IS THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. 
-4-
THERE IS NOTHING NOVEL OR SURPRISING ABOUT
THIS, THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION PROVIDES, AS THE
VERY FIRST OF THE POWERS GRANTED TO THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT UNDER SECTION 51, THE POWER TO MAKE
LAWS ON " TRADE AND COMMERCE WITH OTHER COUNTRIES."
IN VIEW OF THAT, IT IS AN ODD ARGUMENT INDEED TO
SAY THAT WE ARE INTERFERING IN THE RIGHTS OF THE
STATES IN ASSERTING OUR RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS WAY,
IT IS TRUE THAT OUR PREDECESSORS IN GENERAL KEPT
OUT OF THIS FIELD, No DOUBT THEY FELT THEY HAD
GOOD REASONS FOR DOING SO, I SIMPLY ASK YOU TO
ACCEPT THAT OUR ASSERTION OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IN WHAT WE BELIEVE
IS THE NATIONAL INTEREST IS FULLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE LETTER AND SPIRIT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
IF IT WERE NOT, I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT OUR APPROACH
WOULD BE CHALLENGED IN THE HIGH COURT, IT HAS NOT
BEEN CHALLENGED: AND I REJECT THE SUGGESTION THAT
BECAUSE WE HAVE ASSERTED THE NATION'S CONCERN AND
RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS CRUCIALLY IMPORTANT AREA,
WE ARE INTRUDING IN STATE AFFAIRS, nNE MAY ASK:
ARE WE " INTRUDING" IN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION,
IN THE CARE OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE, IN* THE ARTS,
IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION, IN EDUCATION, IN CHILD
CARE, MERELY BECAUSE WE ARE DOING WHAT OUR
PREDECESSORS NEGLECTED TO DO? 
DESPITE MUCH FOREBODING WHEN OUR POLICIES
WERE INTRODUCED, THEIR ADVANTAGES HAVE BEEN AMPLY
DEMONSTRATED, THE INTRODUCTION OF CONTROLS HAS
GIVEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT A MUCH BETTER
KNOWLEDGE OF THE MINERAL INDUSTRY, ITS OVERSEAS
TRADE AND THE TERMS OF ITS CONTRACTS, WHILST
CONFIDENTIALITY HAS BEEN SCRUPULOUSLY OBSERVED,
IT HAS NEVERTHELESS BEEN POSSIBLE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
MINERALS AND ENERGY TO GIVE MATERIAL ASSISTANCE
AND ADVICE ON WORLD PRICING TRENDS AND TO
CO-ORDINATE THE EXPORT ACTIVITIES OF AUSTRALIANMINING
COMPANIES ON A NATIONAL BASIS, THUS WE HAVE
STRENGTHENED THE NEGOTIATING AND BARGAINING POWER OF
OUR EXPORTERS, WE ARE ABLE TO ENSURE THAT OUR
RESOURCES ARE SOLD OVERSEAS AT WORLD MARKET PARITY
PRICES, No LONGER CAN OUR CUSTOMERS PLAY THE GAME
OF DIVIDE AND RULE TO EXTRACT LOWER PRICES FROM OUR
COMPANIES AND CONCESSIONS FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH HAS BEEN
ONE OF FIRM BUT FAIR DEALING IN THE INTERESTS OF BOTH
AUSTRALIA AND OUR TRADING PARTNERS, AND I BELIEVE
OUR ACTIONS HAVE ALREADY HELPED YOU TO OBTAIN SIGNIFICANT
INCREASES IN THE PRICE OF OUR IRON ORE AND COAL EXPORTS
AN EXTRA $ 67 MILLION A YEAR TO DATE IN INCOME FROM IRON ORE
AND AN EXTRA $ 210 MILLION OVfR TWELVE MONTHS IN EXPORT INCOME
FROM COAL, IN THIS WAY ALL AUSTRALIANS ARE BENEFITING
FROM THE CONCENTRATION OF OUR BARGAINING POWER, 
-6-
MY COLLEAGUE, THE MINISTER FOR MINERALS
AND ENERGY, HAS ALREADY SAID THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
EXPORT CONTROL POWERS WILL NOT BE EMPLOYED
CAPRICIOUSLY OR VEXATIOUSLY. THIS IS A UNANIMOUS
ATTITUDE AMONG MEMBERS OF THE CABINET, WE HAVE
ASSURED OUR TRADING PARTNERS, ESPECIALLY JAPAN,
THAT WE ARE SEEKING NO MORE THAN A FAIR PRICE
IN OUR MINERAL CONTRACTS WITH THEM, IT WOULD
BE UNREAL TO SEEK PRICES HIGHER THAN THE MARKET
WILL BEAR WHEN ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF SUPPLY
ARE USUALLY AVAILABLE, WE HAVE TAKEN EVERY
OPPORTUNITY TO EXPLAIN OUR POLICIES TO OUR
TRADING PARTNERS IN BILATERAL CONSULTATIONS AND
IN INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS CONCERNED WITH
MINERALS TRADE, CLEARLY, AGAIN, THIS IS A TASK
ONLY A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CAN PERFORM, 
-7-
I HAVE EMPHASISED THE NEED FOR FAIR RETURNS
FROM THE SALE OF OUR MINERALS. ONE STATE THAT HAS
NOT HAD FAIR RETURNS IS QUEENSLAND A STATE WHERE
MINING HAS A LONG AND PROUD HISTORY GOING BACK TO
THE DISCOVERY OF COAL AT IPSWICH IN 1827. I AM
PLEASED TO LEARN THAT THE OUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
HAS AT LAST TAKEN STEPS TO INCREASE THE SCALE OF
ITS ROYALTY RECEIPTS. I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE
ACTIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OVER THE LAST
18 MONTHS HAVE CREATED A SITUATION WHERE IT HAS NOT
ONLY BEEN POSSIBLE BUT CONSPICIOUSLY IMPERATIVE FOR
THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO DO SO.
EVEN BEFORE THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CAME TO OFFICE, nUEENSLAND'S SCALE OF ROYALTY RECEIPTS
WAS, IN RELATION TO THE VALUE OF ITS MINING OUTPUT,
THE LOWEST AMONG ALL THE IMPORTANT MINERAL-PRODUCING
STATES. AT THE SAME TIME, THE OUEENSLAND MINERALS
INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE HAS AN EXCEPTIONALLY HIGH DEGREE
OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP, PARTICULARLY IN THE DEPOSITS OF
WEIPA BAUXITE AND CENTRAL QUEENSLAND COAL, AND THE
EXPORT PRICES OBTAINED FOR QUEENSLAND COAL WERE
GENERALLY MUCH LOWER THAN THE RULING INTERNATIONAL
LEVELS FOR SHIPMENTS OF COKING COAL OF SUCH QUALITY.
IF I MAY SAY SO WITHOUT BOASTING, IT IS IN PART DUE
TO MY GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES THAT YOUR RETURNS ARE
BEING RAISED. 
-8-
SOON AFTER TAKING OFFICE, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SOUGHT NEGOTIATIONS WHICH HAVE ENABLED YOUR COAL
PRODUCERS TO OBTAIN VERY MARKED INCREASES IN THEIR
EXPORT SELLING PRICES, IN TURN, THE WIDENING
DISPARITY BETWEEN THE VALUES OF YOUR MINERAL
PRODUCTION AND THE FLAT-RATE ROYALTY RETURNS TO
THE OUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS PROMPTED SIR GORDON CHALK
TO BEGIN NEGOTIATIONS WHICH WOULD INCREASE THE
ROYALTY RECEIPTS. SIR GORDON HAS A VERY STRONG CASE,
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF HOW THE EFFECTIVE PURSUIT
OF NATIONAL POLICIES BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
CAN BRING DIRECT BENEFITS TO THE REVENUES OF A STATE,
I HOPE THIS CO-OPERATIVE PROCESS CAN BE CONTINUED,
YOU WILL PERCEIVE TWO CONSTANT THEMES IN
OUR MINERAL AND MINING POLICIES THE PRESERVATION
OF AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND THE MAXIMISING OF
BENEFITS TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FROM THE SALE OF
OUR NATURAL RESOURCES, THE SECOND OF THESE WAS THE
MAIN THEME OF MR. T. M. FITZGERALD'S CELEBRATED PAPER
ON THE MINING INDUSTRY, HE POINTED OUT THAT LACK OF
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN STATE GOVERNMENTS AND THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN POLICIES FOR MINERAL
DEVELOPMENT HAD DEPRIVED THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE OF
BENEFITS THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO DEMAND, 
CONTRARY TO THE OPINION GENERALLY HELD UNTIL RECENTLY,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN PROVIDING VERY
LARGE TAXATION CONCESSIONS FOR MINERAL ENTERPRISES,
NOT ONLY FOR THEIR INITIAL ESTABLISHMENT BUT ALSO
FOR THEIR LATER EXPANSION, CONTRARY TO ANOTHER
IMPRESSION, THE MAJOR PART OF THE TAX CONCESSIONS
CANNOT BE REGARDED MERELY AS TEMPORARY CREDITS,
I DO NOT WANT TO RECOUNT IN DETAIL THE
SUBSTANCE OF THE FITZGERALD REPORT, YOU WILL ALL
BE FAMILIAR WITH IT, I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT ITS
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS HAVE BEEN REBUTTED, LET ME
JUST EMPHASISE THAT THE REPORT DOES NOT CONDEMN
TAX CONCESSIONS IN THEMSELVES, WHAT IT DOES SHOW
IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, THROUGH THE INCOME-TAX
SYSTEM, ARE IN EFFECT SUBSTANTIAL CONTRIBUTORS OF FUNDS
TO THE CAPITAL EXPENDITURES OF EXPANDING MINERAL
ENTERPRISES, WHEN YOU REMEMBER THAT THE ULTIMATE SOURCE
OF THE MINING COMPANIES' PROFITS -OUR SUPERB NATURAL
RESOURCES OF IRON ORE, COAL, BAUXITE, NICKEL AND OTHER
MINERALS ARE PUBLIC ASSETS, AND EXHAUSTIBLE PUBLIC
ASSETS, YOU MUST CONCLUDE THAT. THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
DESERVE TO RECEIVE A GOOD AND PROPER SHARE OF THE
INCOME FROM THESE RESOURCES, 
10
I REMIND YOU THAT THE WHOLE QUESTION
OF TAX CONCESSIONS AND ROYALTIES FOR YOUR
INDUSTRY HAS BEEN REFERRED BY US TO THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION. WE HAVE
ASKED THE COMMISSION " TO INQUIRE AND REPORT ON
THE EFFECT OF TAXATION CONCESSIONS AND ROYALTIES
ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND EFFICIENCY OF THE PETROLEUM
AND MINING INDUSTRIES AND TO ADVISE WHETHER AND IN
WHAT WAYS WE SHOULD OFFER ASSISTANCE TO OR IMPOSE
ROYALTIES ON THESE INDUSTRIES." 
11
I STRESS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IS COMMITTED TO THE CONTINUATION OF SIGNIFICANT
CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN MINING. THIS INVESTMENT
SHOULD NOT INVOLVE LOSSES TO THE NATIONAL REVENUE,
NOR SHOULD IT PRIMARILY PROMOTE FOREIGN. PROFITABILITY.
I AM AWARE OF THE BENEFITS THAT THE MINING INDUSTRY
HAS BROUGHT TO OUR NATION AND TO THIS STATE. THE
WHOLE THRUST OF MY ARGUMENT IS THAT ALL AUSTRALIANS,
INCLUDING QUEENSLANDERS, SHOULD HAVE BENEFITED
MORE FROM THIS DEVELOPMENTD GOVERNMENTS HAVE NOT
TAKEN FULL ADVANTAGE OF OUR RESOURCES IN TERMS OF
PROMOTING THE WELFARE OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE,
MY GOVERNMENT INTENDS TO DO SO IN THE FUTURE.
LET ME SAY A WORD ABOUT THE PROCESSING
OF MINERALS. THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY IS TO
ENCOURAGE THE TREATMENT AND FABRICATION OF MINERAL
RESOURCES IN AUSTRALIA, AT EVERY STAGE OF PROCESSING
THE VALUE OF THESE RESOURCES IS GREATLY INCREASED.
WE WELCOME THE DECISION OF A GROUP OF INTERNATIONAL
IRON AND STEEL PRODUCERS, HEADED BY BHP., TO
STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF PRODUCING SEMI-FINISHED
STEEL PRODUCTS IN AUSTRALIA, WE ARE DEEPLY INTERESTED
IN THE POSSIBLE ESTABLISHMENT OF STEELWORKS IN
OUEENSLAND AND IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA SO THAT THE
SHIPMENT OF QUEENSLAND COAL TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CAN BE COMPLEMENTED BY THE BACK-LOADING OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIAN IRON ORE TO QUEENSLAND, 
12
HERE AGAIN, A QUESTION OF NATIONAL INTEREST
IS RAISED. IF COAL AND IRON ORE ARE TO BE BROUGHT
TOGETHER FOR THIS ADMIRABLE PURPOSE, CLEARLY THIS
CAN BEST BE DONE BY SHIPS OF THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
LINE. INTERSTATE TRADE IS AS MUCH THE PROPER ROLE
AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AS
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE IN OUR ECONOMIC LIFE IS
WELL KNOWN. IT HAS BEEN RECOGNISED BY EVERY
STATE GOVERNMENT EXCEPT QUEENSLAND. IT IS A
MATTER OF REGRET THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
HAS REFUSED TO ALLOW THE A. N. L. TO ENGAGE IN
INTRASTATE TRAFFIC EXCEPT ON THE SINGLE ROUTE
BETWEEN GLADSTONE AND WEIPA,
I SHALL DEAL BRIEFLY WITH TWO ASPECTS OF
MINING THAT CURRENTLY EXERCISE THE GOVERNMENT.
HIGH AMONG THE GOVERNMENT'S AMBITIONS IS TO GIVE
NATURAL RIGHTS TO OUR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, WE ARE
DETERMINED THAT THEIR INTERESTS WILL BE PRESERVED
IN ANY MINING OPERATIONS. MR. JUSTICE E. A. WOODWARD'S
REPORT ON LAND RIGHTS FOR ABORIGINES IN THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY WILL FORM THE BASIS OF OUR APPROACH TO
THIS QUESTION. WHILE THE INTERESTS OF MINING
COMPANIES WILL BE RESPECTED AS FAR AS POSSIBLE,
WE REGARD THIS AS AN ISSUE OF BASIC HUMAN JUSTICE
TRANSCENDING COMMERCIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 
13
NEXT, THE ENVIRONMENT, I AM W SURE
NOT
YOU WILLADISPUTE THE VIEW THAT AUSTRALIA MUST
ADOPT A BALANCED NATIONAL APPROACH TO THE
CONSERVATION OF OUR NON-RENEWABLE MINERAL
RESOURCES. IT IS IMPORTANT THAT CONSERVATIONISTS
RECOGNISE THE CONTRIBUTION TO OUR EXPORT EARNINGS
BY THE MINING INDUSTRY, OUR RELIANCE ON MINERALS TO
PROVIDE THE COMFORTS AND CONVENIENCE OF MODERN LIFE,
IT IS EQUALLY IMPORTANT THAT THE MINING INDUSTRY
RECOGNISE THE WIDER COMMUNITY PRIORITIES OF SOME
LAND USE DECISIONS AND PUBLIC CONCERN ABOUT THE
REHABILITATION OR ALTERNATIVE USE OF LAND AFTER
MINING HAS CEASED. IN RECOGNITION OF THIS, THE
GOVERNMENT HAS ENDORSED THE USE OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT STATEMENT PROCEDURE, IT HAS BEEN OPERATING
THIS PROCEDURE ON AN ADMINISTRATIVE BASIS FOR SOME
TIME, LEGISLATION HAS BEEN DRAFTED TO PUT IT ON. A
FIRMER BASIS AND ENSURE THAT ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
RECEIVE GREATER CONSIDERATION IN DECISION-MAKING
-THAN HITHERTO. I BELIEVE THE ATTITUDE OF THE
GOVERNMENT TO THE ALWEST BAUXITE MINING PROPOSAL
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA DEMONSTRATES THE STRENGTH
OF OUR RESOLVE ON THIS ISSUE. 
14
I COME NOW TO OUR GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR
EXPANDING AUSTRALIA'S ROLE AS A GREAT MINERAL
PRODUCING NATION, THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS
AUTHORITY WILL BE ESTABLISHED TO EXPLORE
AND DEVELOP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERAL RESOURCES
AND TO HELP IMPLEMENT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF
MAXIMUM AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES, THE LEGISLATION IS NOW BEFORE
THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE THIRD TIME,
No AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS EVER HAD A CLEARER
MANDATE FOR ITS LEGISLATION,
APART FROM EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT,
THERE IS A DISTINCT NEED FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
TO HELP SMALLER AUSTRALIAN MINING VENTURES DEVELOP
THEIR DISCOVERIES WITHOUT SACRIFICING CONTROL OR.
OWNERSHIP TO OVERSEAS INTERESTS, WE HAVE A FURTHER
OBLIGATION TO EXAMINE AND DEVELOP ALL SOURCES OF
ENERGYI INCLUDING SOLAR ENERGYI WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE
TO OUR NEEDS WHEN MORE CONVENTIONAL SOURCES ARE
NO LONGER AVAILABLE, THE FUNDS OF THE NEW AUTHORITY
WILL PROMOTE THE SEARCH FOR PETROLEUM AND HELP TO
ENSURE THAT FUTURE ON-SHORE MINING DEVELOPMENT IS
AT LEAST PREDOMINANTLY AUSTRALIAN-OWNED AND CONTROLLED,
WE WILL CONSIDER ASSISTANCE TO THE MANY SMALL
COMPANIES AND SYNDICATES WHICH HAVE USED UP THEIR
CAPITAL ON EXPLORATION, AND WHOSE DISCOVERIES COULD
FALL INTO THE HANDS OF FOREIGN COMPANIES BEFORE THEY
CAN BE DEVELOPED AS AUSTRALIAN CONCERNS, 
15
I COME NOW TO OUR GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR EXPANDING
AUSTRALIA'S ROLE AS A GREAT MINERAL PRODUCING NATION.
THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY WILL BE ESTABLISHED
TO EXPLORE AND DEVELOP OUR PETROLEUM AND MINERAL
RESOURCES AND TO HELP IMPLEMENT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY
OF MAXIMUM AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF OUR
NATURAL RESOURCES,. THE LEGISLATION IS NOW BEFORE THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE THIRD TIME, ! O AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS EVER HAD A CLEARER MANDATE FOR ITS
LEGISLATION. APART FROM EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT, THERE IS
A DISTINCT NEED FOR THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO HELP
SMALLER AUSTRALIAN MINING VENTURES DEVELOP THEIR
DISCOVERIES WITHOUT SACRIFICING CONTROL OR OWNERSHIP
TO OVERSEAS INTERESTS, WE HAVE A FURTHER OBLIGATION TO
EXAMINE AND DEVELOP ALL SOURCES OF ENERGY, INCLUDING
SOLAR ENERGY, WHICH COULD CONTRIBUTE TO OUR NEEDS WHEN
MORE CONVENTIONAL SOURCES ARE NO LONGER AVAILABLE,
THE FUNDS OF THE NEW AUTHORITY WILL PROMOTE THE SEARCH
FOR PETROLEUM AND HELP TO ENSURE THAT FUTURE ON-SHORE
MINING DEVELOPMENT IS AT LEAST PREDOMINANTLY AUSTRALIAN-OWNED
AND CONTROLLED, WE WILL CONSIDER ASSISTANCE TO THE MANY
SMALL COMPANIES AND SYNDICATES WHICH HAVE USED UP THEIR
CAPITAL ON EXPLORATION, AND WHOSE DISCOVERIES COULD ONLY
BE DEVELOPED BY SELLING THEIR EQUITY. THE QUESTION IS
NOT WHETHER WE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL TO DO LESS THE
QUESTION IS WHETHER WE CAN ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
DOES MORE, OUR OBJECTIVE SHOULD BE TO MOBILISE THE
RESOURCES OF OUR PEOPLE, HUMAN AND CAPITAL, AND THE
POWERS OF OUR GOVERNMENTS, BOTH STATE AND FEDERAL, 
16
WE ARE THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
IDENTIFY THE REAL NATURE OF THE MINERALS AND ENEt* r'
SITUATION IN THIS COUNTRY, VE ARE THE FIRST TO
INSIST THAT OUR RESOURCES MUST BE KEPT IN AUSTRALIAN
HANDS, WE ARE THE FIRST TO INSIST THAT THEIR SALES
MUST BRING US FAIR RETURNS. WE ARE THE FIRST TO INSIST
ON A NATIONAL PROGRAM OF EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO MEET OUR FUTURE NEEDS, WE ARE THE FIRST TO RECOGNISE
THAT THIS IS A NATIONAL TASK, AND THEREFORE A TASK IN
WHICH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT ITS FULL
RESPONSIBILITY AND PLAY A LEADING PART IN CO-OPERATION
WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISE, NOT EVEN THE WORLD'S
GREATEST MAJOR OIL COMPANY COULD ADEQUATELY EXPLORE,
WITH THE REQUIRED INTENSITY OF DRILLING, THE VAST
AREA OF THE NORTH WEST SHELF, WHAT CAN POSSIBLY BE
THE OBJECTION TO AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT STAKE IN
THE BUSINESS OF EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION OF
AUSTRALIA'S OWN RESOURCES? THE UNITED KINGDOM
GOVERNMENT HAS SUCH A STAKE, So DO THE GOVERNMENTS
OF FRANCE, ITALY, NORWAY, CANADA, RAZIL, ARGENTINA,
MEXICO, SOUTH AFRICA, IRAN, IRAQ, INDIA, JAPAN, INDONESIA,
NEW ZEALAND AND THE PHILIPPINES, IT IS TIME TO END FUTILE
BICKERING BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS AND-THE PETTY OBSTRUCTIONISM
OF THE STATES, THE REALITIES OFTHE WORLD RESOURCES CRISIS
AND THE IMPORTANCE OF AUSTRALIA AS A MINERAL PRODUCER
ARE TOO URGENT TO IGNORE, 
17
I PUT IT TO YOU THAT THE NATIONAL POLICIES WE
HAVE INTRODUCED ARE ESSENTIAL; MORE THAN THAT, THEY
HAVE ALREADY BEEN PROVED SUCCESSFUL. THERE CAN BE
NO TURNING BACK NOW TO THE FREE-WHEELING, HAPHAZARD
POLICIES OF THE PAST, NO ONE DISPUTES THE FACT THAT IN
A SHORT TIME THE INDUSTRY YOU REPRESENT HAS HELPED
TRANSFORM OUR NATION, k IS DUE IN LARGE MEASURE TO
THE VISION AND ENTERPRISE OF THE MEN IN THIS ROOM
TONIGHT, WE SALUTE YOU FOR THAT; WITH YOUR HELP
WE WANT TO MOVE FORWARD TO GREATER PROGRESS AND
ACHIEVEMENT. IN THAT AMBITION I LOOK CONFIDENTLY
TO THE CO-OPERATION AND SUPPORT OF THIS GREAT
INSTITUTE, WHOSE TOAST I NOW PROPOSE. 



EMBARGO: 9,30 P,.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. E. G. WHITLAM, AT
THE OFFICIAL OPENIN4G OF THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS OF
THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR COUNCIL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, ADELAIDE TOWN
HALL, SATURDAY, 13 JULY 1974
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS AGO UNDER AN EARLIER LABOR GOVERNMENT
THE GOOD 1NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT IN AUSTRALIA WAS INAUGURATED.
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL WAS THE FIRST TO COME INTO FULL
OPERATION AND WAS FOLLOWED IN CLOSE SUCCESSION BY COUNCILS
IN OTHER STATES. THE MOVEMENT'S INAUGURATION CAME AT A TIME
OF PROFOUND IMPORTANCE IN AUSTRALIA' S HISTORY. WE HAD NOT
LONG EMBARKED ON THE GREATEST MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE INTO OUR
COUNTRY THAT WE HAVE EVER SEEN. * AT THE SAME TIME, WE WERE JUST
CREATING THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS. FOR IT IS A FACT
OFTEN OVERLOOKED THAT THERE WERE No AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS UINTIL
] 3L~ 9, THE ACT WIHICH ESTABLISHED AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP FOR
THE FIRST TIME WAS INTRODUCED ON 30 SEPTEMBER 1948 INTO THE
HOUSE op REPRESENTATIVES BY THE FIRST MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,
MIR. ARTHUR CALWELL. IT BECAME OPERATIVE IN 1949 AND THE FIRST
MAN IN HISTORY TO BE AN AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN BY LAW WAS THE THEN
PRIME MINISTER, MR. BEN CHIFLEY, WHO RECEIVED AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENSHIP CERTIFICATE No. 1. 
-2-
THE COMBINATION OFIHESE TWO DEVELOPMENTS THE CREATION
OF AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP AND THE POST-WAR MIGRATION PROGRAM
MAKE THE LATE 1940s A MAJOR WATERSHED IN OUR HISTORY, THEY EVEN
INVOLVED A CERTAIN IRONY, THE FIRST DEVELOPMENT INVOLVED A FORMAL
RECOGNITION THAT WE HAD ACHIEVED A SENSE OF OUR OWN IDENTITY,
THE SECOND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTED US TO A COURSE THAT WOULD
PROFOUNDLY INFLUENCE AND, IN MANY WAYS, CHANGE THAT IDENTITY, IN
ONE OF HIS RARE PUBLIC APPEARANCES, PATRICK WHITE EARLIER THIS
YEAR PRAISED THE HISTORIAN PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, FOR SHOWING
AUSTRALIANS THAT " WHAT WE WERE IS WHAT WE ARE", I WOULD SUGGEST
THAT POST-WAR MIGRATION HAS MEANT THAT WHAT WE ARE AS A NATION
IS INCREASINGLY BEING DETERMINED BY lWHERE WE AUSTRALIANS HAVE
COME FROM, IN A QUITE LITERAL SENSE,
SINCE THE FOUNDATION OF THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT, WE
HAVE INDEED BECOME A DIFFERENT NATION AND A DIFFERENT PEOPLE,
THE INFLUX OF MORE THAN 3 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE POST-WAR PERIOD
HAS MEANT THAT 20 PER CENT OF OUR PRESENT POPULATION WAS BORN
OVERSEAS, TWENTY-FIVE PER CENT OF THE 6 MILLION CHILDREN BORN
HERE SINCE WORLD WAR II BELONG TO FAMILIES IN WHICH ONE OR BOTH
PARENTS WERE OVERSEAS-BORN, THE FORMER MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION,
MR, AL GRASSBY, HAS GONE SO FAR AS TO SUGGEST THAT ONE-THIRD
OF AUSTRALIA'S TOTAL POPULATION IS LINKED EITHER DIRECTLY BY
BIRTH OR LESS DIRECTLY BY FAMILY OR MARRIAGE TO THE HISTORY,
LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND TRADITIONS OF AN OVERSEAS COUNTRY, 
-3-
THE EFFECT OF MIGRATION ON AUSTRALIA'S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY DRAMATIC, THE 1971 CENSUS FIGURES, THE
LATEST AVAILABLE, SHOW THAT 26 PER CENT OF OUR TOTAL WORK FORCE
WAS BORN OVERSEAS, IN MANY KEY INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS THE
MIGRANT ROLE HAS BEEN CRUCIAL, THE BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRIES WHERE MIGRANTS HAVE PROVIDED ONE-THIRD OF THE WORK
FORCE AND THE BUILDING MATERIALS INDUSTRIES FOR SOME OF
WHICH THEY HAVE PROVIDED UP TO HALF THE WORK FORCE ARE GOOD
EXAMPLES, THEIR IMPORTANCE HAS EXTENDED INTO THE MOST SKILLED
AND PROFESSIONAL AREAS, THE 1971 CENSUS SHOWED, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT 30,5 PER CENT OF MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS AND DENTISTS IN
AUSTRALIA AND 36,1 PER CENT OF CHEMISTS, PHYSICISTS, GEOLOGISTS
AND OTHER PHYSICAL SCIENTISTS WERE OVERSEAS BORN,
NOT THAT THE CONTRIBUTION OF NEWCOMERS HAS BEEN LIMITED
TO THEIR LABOUR, ONE HAS ONLY TO LOOK AROUND AT THE CHANGING
FACE OF AUSTRALIA TO SEE THE IMMENSE DIFFERENCE THEY HAVE MADE
CULTURALLY, SOCIALLY AND POLITICALLY,
IT IS, HOWEVER, AN UNPLEASANT TRUTH THAT MANY " OLD" AUSTRALIANS,
WHILE REAPING THE BENEFITS OF THE NEW DIVERSITY OF OUR SOCIETY,
HAVE TENDED TO LOOK ON MIGRANTS PRIMARILY AS A SOURCE OF LABOUR,
AS A MEANS OF ECONOMIC EXPANSION, THE USE OF THE TERM " CANNON
FODDER FOR OUR FACTORIES" HAS TOO OFTEN BEEN APPROPRIATE. IT IS
NOT TRUE OF COURSE TO SUGGEST THAT AUSTRALIAN ATTITUDES HAVE BEEN
DOMINATED BY UNRELIEVED RAPACITY, THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR MOVEMENT
ALONE HAS SYMBOLISED A DIFFERENT, HEALTHIER ATTITUDE, 
YOUR OWN COUNCIL IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS, I AM TOLD, THROUGH
ITS 2,000 OR MORE VOLUNTARY CONTACT WORKERS REACHED WITH A
PERSONAL WELCOME 90 PER CENT OF ALL MIGRANTS TAKING UP
INITIAL RESIDENCE IN THIS STATE, WITH THE ACTIVE AFFILIATION
OF SOME 130 COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS IT HAS HELPED MANY PEOPLE
TO SETTLE IN THEIR NEW ENVIRONMENT,
NEVERTHELESS, IT REMAINS TRUE THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
SIGNIFICANT FAILURES IN OUR HANDLING OF THE PROBLEMS AND
NEEDS OF OUR NEW SETTLERS, TAKE TIEIR EDUCATIONAL NEEDS,
FOR EXAMPLE, A SURVEY OF SIXTY-THREE SCHOOLS OF HIGH MIGRANT
DENSITY IN MELBOURNE LATE IN 1972 REVEALED SERIOUS INADEQUACIES
IN BOTH ACCOMMODATION AND SUPPLY OF TEACHERS, THE REPORT SHOWED
THAT ONLY ONE-THIRD OF MIGRANT CIHILDREN IN THE SIXTY-THREE
SCHOOLS SURVEYED WHO WERE HAVING DIFFICULTY WITH ENGLISH WERE
ACTUALL RECEIVING ASSISTANCE AND, OF THIS ONE-THIRD, 40 PER
CENT WERE NOT RECEIVING SUFFICIENT SPECIALISED TUITION, THE
EFFECT OF THESE SHORTCOMINGS WILL BE TO SEVERELY LIMIT THE
EDUCATIONAL AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO THESE CHILDREN,
A SIMILAR PATTERN OF DISADVANTAGE EMERGESIF WE LOOK AT ANOTHER
AREA, HEALTH INSURANCE, A SURVEY RELEASED IN JANUARY BY THE
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS SHO.! ED THAT ONLY 83., 3 PER CENT
OF PEOPLE BORN OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA WERE COVERED BY HOSPITAL AND
MEDICAL EXPENDITURE ASSISTANCE SCHEMES, COMPARED WITH 87,6 PER CENT
OF THOSE BORN IN AUSTRALIA, OF PEOPLE WHO ARRIVED IN AUSTRALIA
BETWEEN JANUARY 1971 AND AUGUST 1972, WHEN THE'SURVEY WAS
CONDUCTED, ONLY 68 PER CENT WERE COVERED, MORE THAN 53,000
GREEK MIGRANTS OR 37,5 PER CENT WERE UNPROTECTED; ABOUT
52,000 ITALIAN MIGRANTS-OR 19,1 PER CENT WERE WITHOUT COVERAGE, 
THIS KIND OF UNDERPRIVILEGE CAN BE FOUND IN MANY OTHER AREAS
OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE,
IT IS NO WONDER THEN THAT SO MANY MIGRANTS HAVE LEFT
AUSTRALIA, IN 1972, FOR EXAMPLE, AUSTRALIA RECEIVED 112,468
SETTLERS BUT IN THE SAME YEAR 33,172 FORMER SETTLERS LEFT
THE COUNTRY, THIS SORT OF WASTAGE CLEARLY INDICATES THAT SOMETHING
HAS BEEN DRASTICALLY WRONG WITH BOTH OUR RECRUITMENT OF MIGRANTS
AND OUR TREATMENT OF THEM ONCE THEY ARE HERE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR INTRODUCED A NEW
SYSTEM OF OVERCOMING THE RECRUITMENT PROBLEMS, WE HAVE
ASSUMED THAT THE PEOPLE MOST LIKELY TO SETTLE HAPPILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN AUSTRALIA ARE THOSE WHO ALREADY HAVE FRIENDS
OR RELATIVES HERE OR WHO HAVE JOBS AWAITING THEM, FOR THIS
REASON WE NOW GIVE OUR FIRST PRIORITY TO THE REUNITING OF FAMILIES -TO
SPOUSES, DEPENDENT CHILDREN, AGED OR OTHERWISE DEPENDENT PARENTS
AND FIANCEES, SPONSORED BY AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS, OUR OTHER
PRIORITIES HAVE BEEN FOR THE ADMISSION OF CLOSE NON-DEPENDENT
BLOOD RELATIVES; MORE DISTANT RELATIVES AND FRIENDS; AND
PEOPLE WITH OCCUPATIONS REQUIRED TO MEET SPECIFIC NATIONAL
NEEDS, 
-6-
AT THE SAME TIME IN THE LAST 19, MONTHS WE HAVE INTRODUCED
A NUMBER OF MEASURES TO MEET THE NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS OF PEOPLE
WHO HAVE ALREADY SETTLED IN AUSTRALIA, WE HAVE INTRODUCED
PORTABILITY OF PENSION RIGHTS TO ENABLE ANY1ONE TO RECEIVE AGED,
INVALID, WIDOWS'I OR WIVES PENSIONS IN ANY COUNTRY IN WHICH THEY
CHOOSE TO LIVE. WE ARE ESTABLISHING A TELEPHONE INTERPRETER
SERVICE IN OUR CAPITAL CITIES TO DEAL WITH REQUESTS FOR HELP
AND GUIDANCE FROM MIGRANTS. WE ARE OPENING MIGRANT EDUCATION
CENTRES IN OUR CAPITAL CITIES. WE HAVE APPOINTED 48 MIGRANT
WELFARE OFFICERS TO WORK IN THE COMMUNITY AND IN SCHOOLS.
WE HAVE INTRODUCED THE HOME TUTOR SCHEME WHICH IS AIMED AT
REACHING MIGRANT WOMEN AT HOME, USING VOLUNTARY LANGUAGE TUTORS.
IN 1973/ 74 WE ALLOCATED $ 8.2 MILLION FOR SPECIAL INSTRUCTION
FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN IN STATE AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS, COMPARED
WITH $ 5 MILLION IN THE PREVIOUS FINANCIAL YEAR. IAE HAVE
INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO ENABLE ANYONE TO GAIN AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENSHIP AFTER THREE YEARS RESIDENCE, IRRESPECTIVE OF
NATIONAL ORIGINS. WE HAVE BANNED THE DEPORTATION OR THE
CANCELLATION OF CITIZENSHIP OF ANY AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN. VIE
HAVE ESTABLISHED TASK FORCES IN ALL-STATE CAPITALS TO IDENTIFY
THE MOST URGENT SETTLEMENT PROBLEMS CONFRONTING MIGRANTS,
WE HAVE RECEIVED A REPORT FROM A COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMITTEE
OF THE MIGRATION ADVISORY COUNCIL WHICH WE SET UP TO INQUIRE
INTO DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS, EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANTS AND
THEIR USE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES. THESE AND OTHER MEASURES HAVE
BEEN PART OF THE PATTERN OF SEEKING TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS ENJOY
FULL AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES. 
-7-
MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE IF WE ARE TO MEET OUR OBJECTIVES.
WE ALSO NEED TO ENSURE THAT AS A GOVERNMENT OUR ORGANISATIONAL
STRUCTURE IS THE MOST APPROPRIATE ONE. TO ENSURE JUST THAT
WE HAVE IN FACT MOVED IN THE LAST MONTH TO MAKE SOME IMPORTANT
ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES IN RELATION TO MIGRANTS AND MIGRATION,
ON 11 JUNE I ANNOUNCED THE CREATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND IMMIGRATION. I ANNOUNCED THAT CERTAIN FUNCTIONS W1OULD BE
TRANSFERRED FROM THE FORMER DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION TO OTHER
DEPARTMENTS, SUCH As EDUCATION, SOCIAL SECURITY AND FOREIGN
AFFAIRS. I KNOW THAT THERE HAVE BEEN A NUMBER OF CRITICISMS OF THIS
DECISION. MY GOOD FRIEND, MR. EVASIO COSTANZO, WROTE IN LA FIAMMA
THAT LABOR HAD " KILLED IMMIGRATION" WITH THIS ACTION. THE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE GOOD NEIGHBOUR COU'NCIL OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO WRITTEN TO ME TO OPPOSE THE MOVE, SO I WOULD
LIKE TO EXPLAIN OUR REASONS FOR MAKING THE CHANGE AND TO TELL
YOU WHY I BELIEVE IT WILL HELP MIGRANTS.
THE CRITICISMS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE INVOLVE A NUMBER OF
POINTS. ONE IS THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR A CENTRAL DEPARTMENT
TO MEET THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF MIGRANTS. IT IS ARGUED THAT ANY
FRAGMENTATION OF FUNCTIONS WILL LEAD TO INEFFICIENCY AND
DE-HUMANISATION1 THE NEED FOR MIGRANTS TO HAVE A SINIGLE POINT
OF CONTACT HAS BEEN STRESSED. FEARS HAVE BEEN EXPRESSED ABOUT
THE LOSS OF EXPERTISE AND MORALE AMONG MIGRATION OFFICERS THAT
MIGHT FLOW FROM THE DECISION. THERE HAVE BEEN STATEMENTS OF
CONCERN FOR THE FUTURE OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN ACTIVITIES
RELATED TO MIGRANTS, 
-8-
SOME OF THE 48 MIGRANT WELFARE OFFICERS APPOINTED LAST YEAR
HAVE WRITTEN TO ME TO SAY THAT THEY DO NOT BELIEVE THAT
THEY WILL BE ABLE TO CARRY OUT THEIR FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY
AS A RESULT OF THE REORGANISATION, AN ARGUMENT HAS BEEN
ADVANCED THAT, BY MERGING A LARGE PART OF THE OLD DEPARTMENT
OF IMMIGRATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR, WE HAVE
INDICATED THAT WE SEE MIGRATION MERELY AS A MATTER OF MANPOWER,
THAT WE ARE GUILTY OF A KIND OF UP-DATED VERSION OF THE OLD
" INDUSTRIAL CANNON FODDER" ATTITUDE, FINALLY, RUNNING THROUGH
ALL OF THESE CRITICISMS IS AN ASSUMPTION THAT WE HAVE CEASED
TO RECOGNISE THE SPECIAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS OF OUR MIGRANT
COMMUNITY, I CAN ASSERT THAT ALL OF THESE FEARS ARE UNFOUNDED,
MORE THAN THAT, I ASSERT THAT MIGRANTS NILL BENEFIT FROM THE
CHANGES AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE BETTER
EQUIPPED TO MEET THEIR NEEDS, 
-9-
LET ME DEAL WITH THE FIRST GROUP OF CRITICISMS THAT HAVE
BEEN LEVELLED AGAINST THE REORGANISATION, CONTRARY TO THE
ARGUMENT THAT WE NEEDED TO RETAIN THE OLD DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION
AS A CENTRALISED BODY, I WOULD SUGGEST THAT ITS CONTINUED
EXISTENCE IN ITS PREVIOUS FORM WAS RESULTING IN OVER-CENTRALISATION,
MR, GRASSBY POINTED OUT IN A REPORT TABLED IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON 11 OCTOBER LAST YEAR THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF
IMMIGRATION HAD A TOTAL STAFF OF JUST OVER TWO THOUSAND TO DEAL
WITH THE PROBLEMS OF MIGRANTS AS WELL AS HAVING THE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTROL OF SOME 2,2 MILLION ARRIVALS
IN AND DEPARTURES FROM AUSTRALIA ANNUALLY, THAT IS TWO
THOUSAND PEOPLE OUT OF A TOTAL OF 257,00 COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC
SERVANTS, IT WAS BECOMING IMPOSSIBLE FOR SUCH A RELATIVELY
SMALL NUMBER OF MEN AND WOMEN TO DEAL WITH SUCH DIVERSE'MATTERS
AS IMMIGRATION, EMIGRATION, SETTLEMENT, WELFARE, EDUCATION,
CITIZENSHIP AND POPULATION, IN SAYING THIS I DO NOT MEAN
TO CRITICISE THE OFFICIALS OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT
SIMPLY DID NOT HAVE THE PHYSICAL OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO DEAL
WITH ALL THESE MATTERS, IT ALSO NECESSARILY LACKED THE POWER
TO PERFORM MANY OF THESE FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY; SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFITS FOR MIGRANTS OR THE IN-SCHOOL EDUCATION OF MIGRANT
CHILDREN WERE ESSENTIALLY FUNCTIONS OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS,
YET MIGRANTS WERE ENCOURAGED-TO SEE THE DEPARTMENT AS THE
DISPENSER OF GOVERNMENT BENEFITS,
L 
-gAAT
THE SAME TIME, ALTHOUGH THEY HAD AT LEAST SOME
OF THE RESPONSIBILITY, OTHER DEPARTMENTS DID NOT PAY SUFFICIENT
ATTENTION TO DEVELOPING PROGRAMS FOR MIGRANTS, IT WAS
TOO EASY TO FOB OFF MIGRANT QUESTIONS AS MATTERS FOR THE
IMMIGRATION DEPARTMENT, THIS APPLIED TO BOTH STATE AND
FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS,
THIS CONFUSION OF ROLES BECAME EVEN MORE INAPPROPRIATE
WITH THE ADVENT OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, ONE OF THE GREAT
CHANGES TO WHICH WE HAVE BEEN COMMITTED SINCE COMING TO
OFFICE 19 MONTHS AGO HAS BEEN TO INVOLVE THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN NEWl AREAS OF GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN AUSTRALIA, 
PREVIOUSLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD ADOPTED A VERY LIMITED
ROLE IN SUCH AREAS AS EDUCATION AND URBAN AFFAIRS, IN THE FIELD
OF SOCIAL SECURITY, IT ACTED LARGELY AS A MEANS OF GIVING
PENSIONS AND OTHER WELFARE BENEFITS, IN ALL OF THESE AREAS
ITS ROLE HAS NOW CHANGED RADICALLY, IN EDUCATION WE ARE
SEEKING TO ELIMINATE AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE TO PROVIDE EQUAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, NOT JUST TO HAND OUT
ARBITRARY PER CAPITA PAYMENTS, IN SOCIAL SECURITY, THROUGH THE
SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, WE
ARE TRYING TO ESTABLISH COMMUNITY WELFARE FACILITIES FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS, IN SHORT WE HAVE MOVED INTO THE ROLE OF AN
I U
INITIATOR, AN ACTIVIST IN THESE FIELDS IN A WAY \ WHICH NO PREVIOUS
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD DONE,
IT IS ONLY LOGICAL THAT, IN LINE WITH THIS EXPANDED
ROLE, THAT MIGRANT AFFAIRS SHOULD BE ACCEPTED AS COMING WITHIN
THE PURVIEW OF THE RELEVANT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS,
IF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IS TO TACKLE GENUINELY THE PROBLEMS OF
THE DISADVANTAGED IN OUR SCHOOLS IT CANNOT IGNORE MIGRANT EDUCATION,
IF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE SOCIAL WELFARE
COMMISSION ARE TO RESTRUCTURE OUR WELFARE SYSTEM EFFECTIVELY
THEY CANNOT IGNORE THE WELFARE NEEDS OF MIGRANTS, THE SOONER
WE SEE MIGRANT NEEDS AS PART OF THE OVERALL NEEDS OF THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY, THE SOONER THOSE NEEDS WILL BE MET BY THE BODIES WITHi
THE APPROPRIATE STAFF, FACILITIES, FINANCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES, 
-11-
THIS IS NOT FRAGMENTATION, IT IS SPECIALISATION,
THIS IS NOT INEFFICIENCY, THIS IS THE MOST EFFICIENT WAY
IN WHICH TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS,
THE EXPERTISE OF IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS WILL NOT BE LOST
TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE OR, FOR THAT MATTER, TO MIGRANTS, THERE
WILL REMAIN A SIGNIFICANT IMMIGRATION UNIT WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT
OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION, THIS WILL STILL SERVE AS AN ESTABLISHED
CENTREOF CONTACT FOR MIGRANTS, THUS IF A MIGRANT IS UNSURE OF
WHICH DEPARTMENT TO APPROACH WITH A PROBLEM HE WILL STILL BE ABLE
TO USE THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION AS A FIRST POINT
OF CONTACT, IF HIS PROBLEM IS A SPECIALISED ONE, THE OFFICERS
OF THE DEPARTMENT WILL BE ABLE TO ENSURE THAT HE IS REFERRED TO
THE RIGHT PERSON IN THE RIGHT SPECIALIST DEPARTMENT,
A NUMBER OF OFFICERS OF THE OLD DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION
WILL OF COURSE BE TRANSFERRED TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS, THE MIGRANT
WELFARE OFFICERS, FOR EXAMPLE, WILL GO TO THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
SECURITY, THIS CERTAINLY DOES NOT MEAN THAT THEY WILL BE
SUBMERGED AND LOST WITHIN A BUREAUCRATIC MONOLITH, RATHER THEY
WILL BE ABLE TO DRAW ON THE EXPERTISE AND MORE COMPREHENSIVE
RESOURCES OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DEPARTMENT INDEED THE MINISTER
FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MR, BILL HAYDEN, HAS ALREADY SAID THAT
MIGRANT WELFARE SERVICES WILL BE GREATLY ENLARGED AND IMPROVED
AS A RESULT OF THE REORGANISATION. 
-12-
WE WILL ENSURE THAT THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF MIGRANTS WILL
NOT BE LOST SIGHT OF IN THE SPECIALIST DEPARTMENTS, AS AN
EARNEST OF OUR INTENTIONS, I CAN ANNOUNCE TONIGHT ONE RESULT
OF DISCUSSIONS I HAVE HELD WITH THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY,
HE HAS AGREED THAT A PERSON INVOLVED IN MIGRANT WELFARE WILL BE
APPOINTED TO THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION, THE APPOINTEE WILL
PROVIDE A VITAL INFLUENCE ON POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
COMMISSION, IN KEEPING WITH THIS ANNOUNCEMENT, I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT
THERE WILL BE NO LESSENING OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE GOVERNMENT'S
ACTIVITIES IN THE FIELD OF MIGRATION, IF WE ARE TO SUCCEED
IN OUR OBJECTIVE OF ENABLING PEOPLE TO SETTLE HAPPILY AND
PERMANENTLY IN AUSTRALIA WE MUST HAVE THE SUPPORT OF COMMUNITY
ORGANISATIONS, WE COULD NOT CONTINUE SUCH ENTERPRISES AS THE
HOME TUTOR SCHEME WITHOUT THE AID OF VOLUNTEER WORKERS DRAWN
FROM THE COMMUNITY,
I TURN NOW TO THE CRITICISM THAT WE HAVE " KILLED IMMIGRATION"
OR THAT WE NOW SEE IT MERELY AS A MATTER OF MANPOWER, OUR CRITICS
ARE WRONG ON BOTH COUNTS, IF THIS WERE NOT SO WE WOULD HAVE
ABANDONED OUR NEW SYSTEM OF FAMILY REUNION AT THE TIME OF
REORGANISATION, WE HAVE NOT ABANDONED IT, AUSTRALIA WILL
CONTINUE TO WELCOME MIGRANTS WHO -SATISFY THE HUMANE CRITERIA
WHICH WE LAID DOWN LAST YEAR, WE BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT IT
IS POINTLESS, INDEED DAMAGING, TO BRING LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE
TO AUSTRALIA UNLESS THERE ARE JOBS FOR THEM, 
-13-
THE NEW DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND IMMIGRATION WILL HAVE THE
EXPERTISE TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS CAN GAIN EMPLOYMENT,
THE DAYS OF " CANNON FODDER" ARE PAST,
MIGRANTS WILL ALSO BENEFIT FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND IMMIGRATION'S NEW NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SYSTEM,
NEA, T, AS MR, CAMERON HAS CALLED IT WILL ENSURE THAT
MIGRANTS, ALONG WITH OTHER AUSTRALIANS, WHO LOSE THEIR JOBS
THROUGH TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES OR OTHER
FACTORS CAN BE RETRAINED FOR OTHER SATISFYING JOBS,
FINALLY I WANT TO ASSURE YOU OF THE GOVERNMENT'S CONTINUING
COMMITMENT TO TWO VITAL GOALS: THE ABOLITION OF ALL FORMS OF
DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF RACE, COLOUR OR CREED IN
AUSTRALIA AND THE PROGRAM TO ENABLE THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY
TO BENEFIT FROM THE RICH CULTURAL ANT) LINGUISTIC HERITAGE WE
HAVE, THE MAN WHO BROUGHT THOSE COMMITMENTS TO LIFE WAS MR,
AL GRASSBY, LAST SUNDAY I ANNOUNCED A NEW APPOINTMENT FOR
HIM SO THAT HE COULD CONTINUE TO PURSUE THOSE GOALS,
AS A SPECIAL CONSULTANT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON COMMUNITY RELATIONS
MR, GRASSBY WILL CONTINUE TO BE KEENLY INVOLVED IN THE NEEDS
AND ASPIRATIONS OF MIGRANTS, HIS INVOLVEMENT WILL BE FURTHER
ENHANCED IF THE GOVERNMENT CAN SUCCEED WITH LEGISLATION TO
ELIMINATE DISCRIMINATION, HE WOULD BE APPOINTED AS COMMISSIONER
FOR COMMUNITY RELATIONS UNDER THAT LEGISLATION, 
4 -14-
HIS ROLE IN HELPING TO PRESERVE THE CULTURAL AND
LINGUISTIC HERITAGE OF ALL AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS WILL BE
PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT. WE DO NIOT WANT MIGRANTS TO FEEL
THAT THEY HAVE TO ERASE THEIR OWN CHARACTERISTICS AND IMITATE
AND ADOPT COMPLETELY T14E BEHAVIOUR OF EXISTING AUSTRALIAN
SOCIETY. WE WANT TO SEE THAT SOCIETY ENRICHED BY THE CROSS
FERTILISATION THAT WILL RESULT FROM MIGRANTS RETAINING THEIR
OWN HERITAGE. THE OLD APPROACH OF INDIVIDUAL ASSIMILATION
IS NO LONGER GOVERNMENT POLICY. WE ARE CONCERNED WITH THE
INTEGRATION OF ETHNIC COMMUNITIES INTO THE BROADER
AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY. By STRENGTHENING THOSE COMMUNITIES WE
STRENGTHEN THE WHOLE SOCIETY.
IHOPE THAT MY REMARKS TONIGHT WILL LAY TO REST FEARS
WHICH HAVE BEEN AROUSED BY OUR RECENT ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES.
INDEED I HOPE THAT MIGRANTS AND OTHER AUSTRALIANS WILL SEE
THE ADVANTAGES THAT WILL FLOW FRGM THE REORGANISATION.
IN THE FIELDS OF EDUCATION, SOCIAL WELFARE, H EALTH SERVICES,
HOUSING AND ALL OTHER AREAS OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE WE ARE FIRMLY
COMMITTED TO THE PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE AND EQUALITY FOR
MIGRANTS, WE SEE THIS AS A JOB NOT JUST FOR ONE DEPARTMENT
BUT FOR THE WHOLE GOVERNMENT AND, IN FACT, THE WHOLE COMMUNITY. 



' 7'
NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E, G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY UNION CENTENARY
DINNER, 19 JULY 1974
1, THIS IS THE FIRST UNION I EVER JOINED. I BECAME A STUDENT
MEMBER IN 1935 AND A LIFE MEMBER IN 1947. So I'VE BEEN A
UNIONIST FOR 39 YEARS LONGER THAN BOB HAWKE. AND I'VE NEVER
SEEN A MORE ELEGANT, DISTINGUISHED AND PROSPEROUS UNION MEETING
THAN THIS, IT'S A PITY YOU'RE NOT AFFILIATED WITH THE LABOR
PARTY. 2. I WISH CLYDE CAMERON WERE HERE THIS EVENING. THIS MUST
BE THE ONLY UNION THAT HAS NEVER BEEN ON STRIKE DURING THE
PAST 100 YEARS, YOU HAVEN'T EVEN HAD A WORK-TO-RULE.
3, THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY UNION IS AN AMALGAMATION OF THE
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY UNION AND THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY'WOMEN'S
UNION, THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN UNTIL 1972, 1972 WAS A GREAT
YEAR FOR ALL OF US INDEED THE YEAR OF LIBERATION, IT TOOK
23 YEARS FOR MY PARTY TO COME TO POWER, IT TOOK 98 YEARS
FOR YOUR UNION TO BE CONSUMMATED
4, IT WAS VERY UNSATISFACTORY FOR ME TO BE IN ONE UNION
AND MY WIFE IN ANOTHER, WE HAD CONSTANT DEMARCATION DISPUTES.
As YOU KNOW, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TRIED SEVERAL TIMES TO
PASS LEGISLATION FOR UNION AMALGAMATIONS. WE HAVE BEEN BLOCKED
BY THE SENATE, THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY SENATE IS A MUCH MORE
ENLIGHTENED BODY THAN THE SENATE IN CANBERRA, IT'S 120 YEARS
OLD. SOME OF OUR CANBERRA SENATORS WOULD FEEL VERY MUCH AT HOME THER 
-2-
6, YOUR CONSTITUTION SAYS: " THE OBJECTS OF THE UNION SHALL
BE TO PROVIDE A COMMON MEETING GROUND FOR MEMBERS,,,,; TO
PROVIDE DINING AND REFRESHMENT SERVICES; TO PROVIDE CONVENIENCES,
SERVICES AND AMENITIES FOR MEMBERS; TO PROVIDE SOCIAL, CULTURAL
AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES; TO PROMOTE THE INTELLECTUAL, CULTURAL
AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF ITS MEMBERS BY DEBATES AND ACTIVITIES,,,,
IT SOUNDS LIKE A VERY GOOD DESCRIPTION OF PARLIAMENT,
No WONDER I FIND THE UNION SO CONGENIAL,
7, ALTHOUGH THE UNION WAS FORMED IN 1874 ITS CONSTITUTION
WAS NOT ADOPTED UNTIL 1911, IT JUST GOES TO SHOW THAT WE
CAN GET ALONG WITHOUT A CONSTITUTION IF WE TRY,
8. I REGRET TO SAY THAT I WAS NOT A VERY GOOD UNIONIST IN
MY DAYS AT UNIVERSITY, MY PROLETARIAN INSTINCTS WERE NOT WELL
DEVELOPED, I TOOK NO PART IN UNION DEBATES, INTER-COLLEGIATE
DEBATES WERE MORE IN MY LINE, LOOKING BACK THROUGH THE OLD
UNION RECORDER, HOWEVER, I FIND THAT SEVERAL OF MY DISTINGUISHED
CONTEMPORARIES WERE PROMINENT IN DEBATES AND UNION AFFAIRS, 
-3-
THERE WAS TALBOT DUCKMANTON, WHOSE POLISHED ACCENTS
ASSURED HIM OF A GREAT CAREER IN RADIO. THERE WAS BRUCE
MILLER, WHO WAS A RADIO ANNOUNCER BEFORE ATTAINING HIS
PRESENT EMINENCE AT THE AAA. U THERE WAS HERMAN BLACK;
HE ALSO MADE HIS NAME ON RADIO. SIR HERMAN WAS A GENERATION
BEFORE HIS TIME. HE WOULD HAVE RIVALLED JOHN LAWS AND BOB
ROGERS ON TALK-BACK PROGRAMS$
THERE WAS DONALD HORNE, WHO WAS GATHERING NOTES FOR
A BOOK ON " THE EDUCATION OF YOUNG DONALD", J. H. WOOTTENO
NOW PROFESSOR OF LAW IN ANOTHER PLACEo AND JIM PLIMSOLL.
THE UNION WAS A HOT-BED OF RADICALISM IN THOSE DAYS.
MY POLITICS, OF COURSE, WERE WELL TO THE LEFT OF THEIRS.
IMUST HAVE BEEN INFLUENCED By ENOCH POWELL.
9. Two OF THE GREAT PERSONALITIES IN THE UNION'S HISTORY
WERE PROFESSOR E. R. HOLME ( WHOM WE KNEW AS ' SUNNY' HOLME)
AND PROFESSOR F. A. TODD. I HAD THE GOOD FORTUNE TO BE
TAUGHT. BY BOTH OF THEM. E. R. HOLME WAS my ENGLISH PROFESSOR
AND F. A. TODD GAVE ME SOME ACQUAINTANCE WITH LATIN.
THE UNIVERSITY WAS A DIFFERENT PLACE IN MY DAY.
IT WAS A MUCH STUFFIER AND MORE CONSERVATIVE INSTITUTION.
IT WAS QUIETER AND VERY MUCH SMALLER. WOMEN STUDENTS WERE
DECIDEDLY IN THE MINORITY. INOTICE THAT DESPITE YOUR
AMALGAMATION YOU HAVE YET TO ELECT A WOMAN AS PRESIDENT
OF THE UNION. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME M1INISTER,
T1IlE HON. E. G. WH ITLAM1 Q. C. M. P.
AT THE 1611l ANNIVERSARY OF THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE
LIVERPOOL DISTRICT [: oSPIIAL,
SYDNEY FRIDAY 296 JULY 1974i
TtHE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT HOSPITAL STANDS AS
SOMETHING OF AN OASIS IN A DESERT OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
IN THE IWESTERN SUBURBS OF SYDNEY. IT IS ONE OF ONLY
1' 4 PUBLIC AND 6 PRIVATE HOSPITALS IN ONE OF THE MOST POPULOUS
AND RAPIDLY GROWING AREAS OF AUSTRALIA. THE WESTERN
METROPOLITAN AREA OF SYDNEY, WHICH INCLUDES LIVERPOOL AS
~ NE OF ITS FOCAL POINTS, HAS A POPULATION OF NEARLY ONE
MILLION,. OR NEARLY ONE QUARTER OF THE POPULATION OF THE
STATE. IT IS EXPERIENCING A RAPID POPULATION GROWTH OF
MORE THAN 10 A YEAR AND YOUNG FAMILIES COMPRISE MOST OF
THIS INCREASE. DESPITE ITS SIZE AND RATE OF GROWTH, THE AREA IS
DEFICIENT IN MOST HEALTH SERVICES. THIS APPLILS PARTICULARLY
TO HOSPITAL SERVICES. THE AREA HAS ONLY 3.3 BEDS FOR EVERY
THOUSAND PEOPLE COMPARED WITH THE STATE'S AVERAGE OF 6.4# BEDS
PER THOUSAND. THE DEFICIENCY IS EVEN GREATER WHEN ONE CONSIDERS
THE SHORTAGE OF MATERNAL AND PAEDIATRIC SERVICES WHICH EXISTS
IN AN AREA WITH SO MANY YOU1NG FAMILIES. 
-2
THE PROVISION AND PLANN~ ING OF HEALTH CARL FACILITIES
IN AUSTRALIA FOR TOO LONG HAS BEEN CHARACTERISED BY SHORTCOMINGS
OF THIS KIND. INDEED IT IS A LACK OF PLANNING WHICH IS THE
FAULT. MY COLLEAGUE, THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY,
AM. BILL HAYDEN, HAS POINTED OUT TH-AT IN SYDNEY, FOR EXAMPLE,
THE CITY I5 7 TEACHING HOSPITALS ARE LOCATED WITHIN AN
EIGHT MILE RADIUS OF THE G. P. O. AND 5 OF THEM ARE WITHIN
A FOUR MILE RADIUS. YET THE GREAT MAJORITY OF SYDNEY'S
POPULATION LIVES A CONSIDERABLE DISTANCE OUTSIDE THESE
PARAMETERS, BEYOND HOSPITALS, THERE IS A MALDISTRIBUTION OF
DOCTORS AND OTHER SKILLED MEDICAL MANPOWER. THE RESULT IS
THAT PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN LONG-ESTABLISHED AND GENERALLY
AFFLUENT AREAS HAVE ACCESS TO THE FULL RANGE OF HIGH QUALITY
HEALTH CARE. IN CONTRAST, PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN NEWER AND
FREQUENTLY DISADVANTAGED AREAS DO NOT. HAVE SUCH ACCESS.
IT IS MONSTROUSLY INEQUITABLE THAT PARENTS ON A
LOW INCOME LIVING IN THE WESTERN SUBURBS SHOULD HAVE TO SPEND
HOURS TRAVELLING AT RELATIVELY GREAT COST 20 MILES OR MORE
BY TRAIN AND BUS TO VISIT A SICK CHILD IN A PAEDIATRIC HOSPITAL
WHILE AFFLUENT PARENTS LIVING IN, SAY, THE EASTERN SUBURBS
OF SYDNEY FACE ONLY A SHORT CAR TRIP TO VISIT THEIR CHILD.
IT IS EQUALLY INEQUITABLE THAT THE WESTERN SUBURBS FAMILY
SHOULD SUFFER A DEARTH OF DOCTORS TO TREAT THEIR ILLNESSES AND
INJURIES WHILE THE EASTERN SUBURBS FAMILY SHOULD LIVE IN AN AREA
WHICH ABOUNDS IN MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL SERVICES. IT IS NOT THAT
WE SHOULD DENY THE AFFLUENT ACCESS TO THE BEST HEALTH CARE;
BUT WE MUST ENSURE THAT EVERYONE IN THE COMMIUNITY RECEIVES THE
BEST POSSIBLE TREATMENT, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR FINANCIAL MEANS
AND THEIR PHYSICAL LOCATION. s. m1/ 3 
IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT SAW THE NEED FOR AN URGENT AND THOROUGH EXAMINATION
OF THE DELIVERY OF HEALTH SERVICES THROUGHOUT 4USTRALIA.
A HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES INTERIM COMMITTEE, WHICH
LATER BECAME BY STATUTE THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES
COMMISSION, WAS APPOINTED LAST YEAR TO INVESTIGATE,
REPORT ON AND RECOMMEND NECESSARY ACTION TO OVERCOME BOTH
IMMEDIATE AND LONG-TERM PROBLEMS. THE OBJECTIVE OF THE
COMMISSION IS " THE PROVISION OF HIGH QUALITY, READILY
ACCESSIBLE, REASONABLE COMPREHENSIVE, CO-ORDINATED AND
EFFICIENT HEALTH AND RELATED WELFARE SERVICES AT LOCAL,
REGIONAL, STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS." fN THE COMMISSION'S
RECOMMENDATIONS WE ALLOCATED $ 4t. 5 MILLION IN 1) 131/ 4
TO MEET URGENT NEEDS FOR ADDITIONAL HOSPITALS IN SYDNEY,
MIELBOURNE AND BRISBANE. OF THAT AMOUNT, 14 MILLION WAS TO
BE PROVIDED TOWARDS THE COST OF PLANNING AND COMMENC. ING
THE HOSPIT AL PROPOSED FOR WESTMEAD SINCE 1968. TO DATE
ONLY $ 577,000 HAS BEEN USED FOR THE WESTMEAD PROJECT. THIS
MEANT THAT THE GOVERNMENT WAS ABLE TO ALLOCATE FROM THE UNUSED
PFUNDS $ 500,000 TOWARDS THE COST OF A NEW WARD BLOCK AT
THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT HOSPITAL. INEARLY $ 112,0J00 OF THIS HAD
BEEN SPENT BY THE END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR. ms i 
THIS IS ONLY THE BEGINNING OF A MAJOR OVERHAUL
OF HOSPITAL SERVICES ENVISAGED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
ON 10 APRIL THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH, DR EVERINGHAM, TABLED
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES A " REPORT ON HOSPITALS IN
AUSTRALIA" PREPARED BY THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES
COMMISSION. THE REPORT PROPOSES THAT OVER A FIVE YEAR
PERIOD BEGINNING ON 1 JULY 1974 A PROGRAM BE IMPLEMENTED
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION OF HOSPITALS, MENTAL
HEALTH FACILITIES, PUBLIC NURSING HOMES AND HEALTH HOSTELS
AT A TOTAL COST OF $ 1,160 MILLION. THE REPORT HAS YET TO
BE CONSIDERED BY CABINET, SO IT IS TOO EARLY FOR ME TO
DEFINE THE EXACT EXTENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
INVOLVEMENT IN SUCH A PROGRAM. HOWEVER, IT IS QUITE CLEAR
THAT, IF VIE ARE TO HAVE ADEQUATE HOSPITALS, THE 1USTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO BECOME MORE INVOLVED IN THEIR PLANNING
AND FINANCING THAN IT HAS BEEN IN THE PAST, THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS SIMPLY DO NOT HAVE THlE RESOURCES TO OVERCOME THE
DEFICIENCIES THAT EXIST AT PRESENT. U\ AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INVOLVEMENT IS ESPECIALLY NECESSARY IF WE ARE TO SOLVE THE
PRESENT GROSS MALDISTRIBUTION OF FACILITIES. SINCE THE 1946
REFERENDUM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS POSSESSED, BUT
HITHERTO HAS NOT EXERCISED, THE CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
TO PROVIDE HOSPITAL BENEFITS AND MEDICAL SERVICES; IN OTHER
WORDS, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN ITSELF BUILD, FINANCE
AND MANAGE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH CENTRES. 1611 
THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS MUST EXTEND BEYOND
CAPITAL COSTS. THE RUNNING COSTS OF HOSPITALS REPRESENT
A EVER-INCREASING PROBLEM. THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION REPORT IN APRIL POINTED OUT THAT,
AS TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND THE COMPLEXITY OF INSTITUTIONS
INCREASE, SO THE HOSPITAL SYSTEM BECOMES MORE LABOUR INTENSIVE.
" THIS TREND MAY BE PECULIAR TO HOSPITALS AND IS UNLIKELY TO
BE REVERSED," I THE REPORT SAID. THIS PROBLEM EXTENDS INTO
OTHLR HEALTH SERVICES AS WELL AS HOSPITALS. AT PRESENT
HEALTH SERVICES COST OUR NATION MORE THAN $ 2,000 MILLION A
YEAR, OR ABOUT 5.3Z' OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT. THEIR COST
IS INCREASING SO DRAMATICALLY THAT IT HAS BEEN ESTIMATED THAT
OUR EXPENDITURE ON HEALTH SERVICES COULD BE MORE THAN 12% OF
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT BY THE YEAR 2-000. THE RESULT OF THIS
INCREASE HAS BEEN ESPECIALLY REFLECTED IN HOSPITALS.
HIGHER CHARGES AND GROWING DEFICITS HAVE BECOME A FEATURE
OF OUR HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN RECENT YEARS.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL IN FACT ASSUME A MUCH
GREATER ROLE IN THE MEETING OF RUNNING COSTS UNDER ITS PROPOSED
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM. UNDER THE PRESENT SYSTEM IT PAYS A
SUBSIDY OF ONLY $ 2 A DAY FOR HOSPITAL PATIENTS, ALTHOUGH THERE
ARE INEVITABLY OTHER BENEFITS WHICH DERIVE FROM TAXATION
CONCESSIONS. IT IS ESTIMATED THAT IN 1974/ 75 THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE TO PAY ONLY $ 165 MILLION TOWARDS THE
OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS. THIS COMPARES WITH AN
ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE OF $ 5410 MILLION BY STATE GOVERNMENTS AND
$ 2' 40 MILLION BY INSURED AND UNINSURED PATIENTS. 16 
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM INVOLVES A GREAT
AND CONTINUING IMPROVEMENT IN THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS, UNDER BILATERAL AGREEMENTS WITH EACH STATE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD BE PREPARED TO MEET 50 PER CENT
OR,' fHE NET OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS, THE
AUSIRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAID BENEFITS APPROACHING 50 PER CENT
OF OPERATING COSTS FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF THE HOSPITAL
BENEFIT ACT IN 1945 UNTIL THE ACT'S REPLACEMENT BY THE
LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT IN 1952, HOSPITALS IN
ALL STATES WILL BENEFIT FROM THE NEW ARRANGEMENT, THE TOTAL
GAIN TO STATE GOVERNMENTS IN 1974/ 75, IF THE PROGRAM HAD
BEEN INTRODUCED IN TIME, WOULD HAVE BEEN $ 80 MILLION, IN
NEW SOUTH WALES THE GAIN WOULD HAVE BEEN $ 15 MILLION,
THE IMPROVEMENT IN THE FINANCIAL SITUATION OF
THE STATE-PUBLIC HOSPITALS SYSTEMS WILL NOT OF COURSE BE
THE ONLY BENEFIT FROM THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM, THE
PROGRAM WILL OVERCOME THE INEQUITIES AND LACK OF COVERAGE
WHICH EXIST AT PRESENT UNDER THE PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE
SYSTEM, FOR A START, THE PROGRAM WILL AUTOMATICALLY COVER
ALL RESIDENTS OF AUSTRALIA, IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR MEANS OF
THEIR BACKGROUNDS, IT WILL BE FINANCED IN THE MOST EQUITABLE
MANNER AS THE PAYMENTS TO BE MET BY INDIVIDUALS* WILL BE
BASED ON THEIR CAPACITY TO PAY, THE PROPOSED LEVY OF
1,35 PER CENT ON TAXABLE INCOME WILL PROVE CHEAPER THAN THE
PRESENT HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME FOR THE GREAT MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS, 117 
-7-
FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS, AUSTRALIANS WILL RECEIVE
A COMPREHENSIVE RANGE OF MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT,
IF A DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL DIRECT TO THE PROPOSED HEALTH
INSURANCE COMMISSION, HIS PATIENT WILL NOT HAVE TO PAY ANYTHING
FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT, EVEN IF THE DOCTOR SENDS HIS BILL
TO HIS PATIENT, THE COMMISSION WILL PAY AT LEAST 85 PER CENT
OF THE SCHEDULED FEE, AND IN NO CASE, WHERE THE SCHEDULED FEE
IS CHARGED, WOULD THE PATIENT HAVE TO PAY MORE THAN $ 5 FOR ANY
MEDICAL SERVICES, TO DISMISS IMMEDIATELY ONE PHONY ISSUE
THAT HAS BEEN RAISED BY OUR OPPONENTS, THESE ARRANGEMENTS
WILL APPLY TO SERVICES PROVIDED BY ANY DOCTOR THAT ANY PATIENT
CHOOSES TO CONSULT, FOR HOSPITAL TREATMENT, EVERYONE WILL BE
ENTITLED TO FREE STANDARD WARD TREATMENT: ADMISSION TO THESE
WARDS WILL NOT BE RESTRICTED TO PEOPLE WHO SATISFY THE
SAVAGE MEANS TESTS WHICH APPLY IN SOME STATES AT PRESENT,
THE PROGRAM WILL ACHIEVE. THIS GOAL WITHOUT DESTROYING THE
VIABILITY AND INDEPENDENCE OF RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE AND
COMMUNITY HOSPITALS, PATIENTS IN PRIVATE WARDS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS OR IN PRIVATE HOSPITALS WILL ATTRACT A BED SUBSIDY
OF $ 16 PER DAY FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. A CONSIDERABLE
IMPROVEMENT ON THE $ 2 A DAY WHICH IS CURRENTLY PAID, THE
GOVERNMENT AIMS TO ENSURE THAT PRIVATE INSURANCE IS AVAILABLE
AT REASONABLE COST TO COVER ANY EXTRA CHARGES FACED BY
PRIVATE PATIENTS, 1, ,/ 8 
-8-
THE FAIRNESS, THE UNIVERSAL COVERAGE AND THE
OTHER BENEFITS OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM HAVE
COMPELLED US TO PERSEVERE WITH ITS IMPLEMENTATION IN
THE FACE OF SOME BITTER OPPOSITION, THIS IS NOT A BLIND
DOCTRINAIRE PERSEVERANCE, THE GOVERNMENT HAS WON TWO
ELECTIONS IN WHICH THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF OUR PLATFORM, IN FACT PROBABLY NO CURRENT ISSUE IN
AUSTRALIAN POLITICS HAS RECEIVED A MORE THOROUGH AIRING,
WE BELIEVE THAT, IN ELECTING US TO GOVERNMENT, THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE INDICATED A DESIRE FOR THE SORT OF
CHANGE TO WHICH WE ARE COMMITTED,
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM IS COVERED BY TWO
OF THE SIX BILLS WHICH WILL BE PUT TO A JOINT SITTING OF
BOTH HOUSES OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT IN THE WEEK
AFTER NE*( T. BECAUSE OF THE RENEWED SUPPORT GIVEN TO IIS
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE ON 18 MAY, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
HAVE A MAJORITY TO ENSURE THEIR PASSAGE AT THE JOINT
SITTING, DESPITE THIS RENEWED SUPPORT, OUR OPPONENTS PERSIST
IN TRYING TO PREVENT THE PROGRAM FROM COMING INTO OPERATION#
THEIR SPOKESMEN IN THE PARLIAMENT SAY THAT THEY WILL OPPOSE
ANY COMPLEMENTARY LEGISLATION, WE ARE EQUALLY DETERMINED
NOT TO BE THWARTED YET AGAIN BY THESE PROPONENTS OF A
MORIBUND AND UNJUST SYSTEM, IT REMAINS THE GOVERNMENT'S
FIRM INTENTION TO INTRODUCE THE PROGRAM, OBSTRUCTION IN
THE SENATE MAY HAVE DELAYED ITS INTRODUCTION, BUT WILL NOT
PREVENT IT, WE EXPECT THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM TO
BECOME A REALITY IN 1975, 
THE PROGRAM WILL NOT IN ITSELF OVERCOME ALL OF THE
FAILINGS OF HEALTH CARE IN AUSTRALIA., THE WORK OF THE
HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION MUST PLAY A MAJOR PART
IN THIS PROCESS0 I HAVE ALREADY DESCRIBED ITS ACTIVITIES IN
RELATION TO HOSPITALS. MUCH NEEDS TO BE DONE IN THE PROVISION
OF OTHER COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES. IT IS FOR THIS REASON
THAT IN 1973174 WE ALLOCATED $ 10 MILLION TO ASSIST THE STATES
AND ELIGIBLE ORGANISATIONS TO MEET THE CAPITAL AND OPERATING
COSTS OF REGIONAL ORGANISED COMMUNITY-BASED HEALTH SERVICES.
COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES, PROVIDED AT CENTRES AND THROUGH
DOMICILIARY SERVICES, OFFER A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR COMBATING
THE UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION OF DOCTORS AND OTHER HEALTH WORKERS
IN OUR COMMUNITY. IN ADDITION, WE HAVE PROVIDED 7.5 MILLION
TO ASSIST THE STATES TO DEVELOP COMMUNITY-BASED MENTAL HEALTH.-
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY SERVICES.
COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES WILL NOT ONLY BENEFIT
THE PUBLIC BUT WILL PROVIDE MORE EXCITING NEW POSSItlILITIES
FOR HEALTH WORKERS. ALL GOVERNMENTS ARE CURRENTLY UNDERGOING
A RETHINKING OF THEIR ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE IMPORTANCE OF
ANCILLARY MEDICAL STAFF. RECENT INCREASES GRANTED TO
NURSES IN NEW SOUTH WALES ARE ONE INDICATION OF THIS.
BUT THE RETHINKING MUST INVOLVE MORE THAN A QUESTION OF MONEY.
IT IS IN THIS CONTEXT THAT COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES PROVIDE
GREAT OPPORTUNITIES, THERE IS EVERY INDICATION THAT NURSES
AND OTHER ANCILLARY STAFF WILL FORM A NEW " IFRONT LINE" I OF
MEDICINE, OPERATING FROM HEALTH CENTRES THEY WILL PLAY A
VITAL ROLE IN THE IMPROVEMENT OF HOME CARE SERVICES. AT THE
CENTRES THEMSELVES THEY WILL BE ABLE TO PERFORM MANY FUNCTIONS
AS A VALUABLE SUPPLEMENT TO THE WORK OF DOCTORS. 
10
THE PROVISION OF A COMPREHENSIVE HIGH QUALITY SYSTEM
OF HEALTH CARE IN AUSTRALIA DOES NOT REPRESENT AN EASY TASK.
WE SUFFER FROM YEARS OF NEGLECT IN PLANNING AND FINANCE,
BUT THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT WITH THE TWIN WEAPONS
OF THE HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM AND THE HOSPITALS AND
HEALTH SERVICES COMMISSION WE CAN MEET THE NEEDS OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM,
AT THE-OPENING OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA HOUSE,
SYDNEY,-FRIDAY 26 JULY 1974
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT DAY IN THE HISTORY OF
BOTH OUR COUNTRIES IMPORTANT IN SUBSTANCE, IMPORTANT
IN SYMBOLISM. THE BUILDING ITSELF, ITS LOCATION
IN AUSTRALIA'S OLDEST, GREATEST CITY, EXPRESSES THE
CHANGING NATURE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA'S RELATIONS WITH
AUSTRALIA AND THE REGION IN WHICH WE ARE NEIGHBOURS
AND PARTNERS. Now PAPUA NEW GUINEA WILL HAVE
ITS OWN OFFICES IN AUSTRALIA'S INDUSTRIAL AND
COMMERCIAL HEART AS WELL AS THE COMMISSION IN THE
NATIONAL CAPITAL, PAPUA NEW GUINEA ALREADY IS
REPRESENTED IN INDONESIA AND IS SHOR~ TLY TO ESTABLISH
COMMISSIONS IN NEW ZEALAND AND FIJI. 
-2-
THESE MOVES ARE PART OF THE RAPID
ASSUMPTION OF INDEPENDENT STATUS BY A VIRTUALLY
INDEPENDENT NATION, BY THE BREAKING OF THIS SPEAR
AND BY MY ACCEPTANICE OF HALF OF IT WE SYMBOLISE THE
WAY IN WHICH THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AND AUSTRALIA IS CHANGING SWIFTLY YET DEVELOPING
IN A SPIRIT OF MUTUAL TRUST AND CLOSE FRIENDSHIP.
IN ACCEPTING HALF OF THIS SPEAR, I AGAIN REASSERT
AND REAFFIRM AUSTRALIA'S ABSOLUTE WILLINGNESS TO
CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE CLOSELY WITH A UNITED
PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN THE FULFILMENT OF ITS HOPES
FOR A UNIT'D, PROUD AND FREE NATION,
THE BREAKING SYMBOLISES A BREAK FROM THE
OLD DEPENDENCE; MY ACCEPTANCE OF ONE OF ITS HALVES
ON BEHALF OF AUSTRALIA FROM THE CHIEF MINISTER ON
BEHALF OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA SYMBOLISES THE CONTINUITY
OF OUR CO-OPERATION, OUR TRUST AND GOODWILL BETWEEN
THE CHIEF MINISTER AND ME, BUT MORE IMPORTANT,
MORE ENDURING, BETWEEN PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND AUSTRALIA. 
TO THOSE OF US WHO HAVE CLOSELY WATCHED
THE UNFOLDING OF EVENTS IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN THE
WHAT HAS OCCURRED, WHAT HAS BEEN ACHIEVED,
SEEMS LITTLE SHORT OF MIRACULOUS. IT IS BARELY
THREE AND A HALF YEARS AGO SINCE I FORESHADOWED
IN PORT MORESBY THE POLICY FOR INDEPENDENCE
WHICH WOULD BE ADOPTED BY A LABOR GOVERNMENT IF
WE WERE RETURNED AT THE 1972 ELECTIONS.
WE ALL REMEMBER THE EXTRAORDINARY SHOCKWAVES
WHICH THAT ANNOUNCEMENT GENERATED,-BOTH IN PAPUA
NEW GUINEA AND AUSTRALIA, YET EVENTS HAVE MADE
MY SUGGESTED TIMETABLE APPEAR IN RETROSPECT,
MODEST AND MODERATE, INDEED, WE HAVE HAD A
CLASSIC ILLUSTRATION OF THE POWER OF AN IDEA WHOSE
TIME HAD COME. THE FORCES FOR INDEPENDENCE ALREADY
EXISTED; THEY NEEDED ONLY EXPRESSION TO SPRING
INTO VIGOROUS LIFE, 
I~
AT THAT TIME I WORKED FROM ONE BASIC
ASSUMPTION, IT WAS THIS: THAT PAPUA NEq GUINEA
WAS ALREADY PROVIDING, FROM HER OWN RESOURCES,
MORE SKILLED MEN AND WOMEN THAN AUSTRALIA WOULD
BE ABLE OR WILLING TO MAKE AVAILABLE FOR PAPUA
NEW GUINEA PURPOSES FROM HER RESOURCES,
SO IT HAS PROVED, IT IS THIS FACT WHICH PROVIDES
THE BASIS FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA'S INDEPENDENCE,
WHAT COULD HARDLY HAVE BEEN FORESEEN IN 1970 WAS THE
SPEED WITH WHICH EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PARTIES WOULD
EMERGE IN THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY, THIS NEW FACT
HAS PROVIDED THE FIRM BASIS FOR THE AMAZINGLY
RAPID ASSUMPTION OF THE SUBSTANCE OF INDEPENDENCE,
IF NOT ALL THE FORMS, IN THE LAST THREE YEARS.
ABOVE ALL WE COULD NOT HAVE RECKONED ON
BEING SO FORTUNATE IN THE CHOICE AND STATURE OF
THE LEADERSHIP WHICH HAS EMERGED, AT A CRUCIAL TIME
IN HER HISTORY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA HAS FOUND LEADERSHIP
OF THE HIGHEST QUALITY AND INrEGRITY, A LEADERSHIP
WHICH HAS ALREADY WON RESPECT THROUGHOUT THE REGION, 
So SUCCESSFUL HAS THE TRANSITION BEEN THAT
NEITHER THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA NOR OF
AUSTRALIA NEED ANY LONGER FEEL UNDULY PREOCCUPIED
WITH THE FORMALITIES OF INDEPENDENCE, IN ALL BUT
FORMALITY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA IS INDEPENDENT,
LET ME REPEAT THE WORDS OF THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL IN
HIS SPEECH OPENING THE PARLIAMENT:
" MY GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED BY THE CLEAREST
PLEDGES TO CONTINUE SUBSTANTIAL AID TO A
UNITED PAPUA NEW GUINEA BEFORE AND AFTER
INDEPENDENCE, SINCE PAPUA NEW GUINEA
ACHIEVED SELF-GOVERNMENT IN DECEMBER 1973,
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENTS OF
AUSTRALIA AND OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA HAS BEEN
BASED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF EQUALITY, MUTUAL
RESPECT AND MUTUAL CO-OPERATION, PENDING
THE FINAL DECISION OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
TO DECLARE INDEPENDENCE FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL CONDUCT ITS
RELATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AS A GOVERNMENT OF AN INDEPENDENT NATION TO
WHICH. AUSTRALIA HAS CERTAIN SPECIAL AND
INESCAPABLE OBLIGATIONS," 
-0-
IN OTHER WORDS, THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA WILL MAKE
ITS OWN DECISION AS TO THE ACTUAL DATE OF INDEPENDENCE
WHILE FOR ITS PARTI THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL DEAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
AS THE GOVERNMENT OF AN ALREADY INDEPENDENT COUNTRY,
BEFORE INDEPENDENCE AND AFTER INDEPENDENCE,
ALL AUSTRALIAN AID WILL BE DIRECTED THROUGH THE
GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA, IT WILL BE DIRECTED
TOWARDS THE GOALS AND PRIORITIES SET BY THE GOVERNMENT
OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA, AUSTRALIAN AID WILL NOT
INVOLVE INTERFERENCE IN THE PREPARATION OF PAPUA
NEW GUINEA'S IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS AND ANNUAL BUDGETS,
THESE ARE AND WILL CONTINUE TO BE THE RESPONSIBILITY
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
THE PROGRESS BEING MADE BY PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
OF WHICH THIS BUILDING IS ONE OF THE EXTERNAL SIGNS,
GIVES GROUND FOR THE HIGHEST OPTIMISM, YEI WE SHOULD
NOT SEEK TO UNDERESTIMATE THE DIFFICULTIES IN THE
PATH ON WHICH WE HAVE ALL EMBARKED, THE EFFORT TO
BUILD A UNITED DEMOCRACY AT ANY TIME IS ONE OF THE
GREATEST CHALLENGES STATESMANSHIP CAN EVER FACE; AND
THESE ARE NOT ORDINARY TIMES: THEY ARE NOT EASY TIMES,
DEMOCRACY EVERYWHERE IS UNDERGOING GREAT STRESSES
AND GREAT CHALLENGES, 
-7-
EVEN THE VERY OLDEST AND GREATEST DEMOCRACIES
ARE NOT EXEMPT FROM TURMOIL AND TRAVAIL. PAPUA
NEW GUINEA IS DEVELOPING A CONSTITUTION FOR A
NEW AND INDEPENDENT NATION. IT WILL DEVELOP THAT
CONSTITUTION IN ITS OWN WAY, IN ITS OWN TIME.
IT WILL COMBINE FOREIGN PRECEDENTS WITH ITS OWN
TRADITIONS, THERE IS SOMETHING HOWEVER FAR MORE
IMPORTANT TO DEMOCRACY THAN THE LETTER OF A CONSTITUTION,
IT IS THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THAT CONSTITUTION IS
APPLIED BY THE ELECTED MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF OPERATING IT. IT IS NOT ONLY
WRITTEN RULES WHICH MAKE A DEMOCRACY STRONG; THE
UNWRITTEN RULES ARE JUST AS IMPORTANT.
IT IS ALL TOO EASY TO SUBVERT DEMOCRACY BY PERFECTLY
LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL MEANS IF THE WILL TO ABIDE
BY THE UNWRITTEN RULES IS ABSENT. No NATION,*
NOT EVEN AUSTRALIA ITSELF, IS EXEMPT FROM THE DANGERS
WHICH FOLLOW A BREAK( DOWN IN THE ACCEPTANCE OF THlE
UNWRITTEN RULES. THIS IS A MEASURE OF THE CHALLENGE
FACING PAPUA NEW GUINEA. WE ALL RECOGNISE THE
DIFFICULTIES, YET AGAIN IT MUST BE SAID THAT THE
REMARKABLE PROGRESS OF THE LAST THREE YEARS GIVES
THE BEST GROUNDS FOR CONFIDENCE THAT THEY WILL BE
TRIUMPHANTLY OVERCOME.
MAY THIS BUILDING BE A SYMBOL OF THE
NEW MATURITY OF OUR PARTNERSHIP AS TWO FREE DEMOCRATIC
INDEPENDENT PARTNERS. 



EMBARGO: 3,00 P. M.
SATURDAY 3,8,74
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. EG. WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW LITHGOW CITY COUNCIL ADMINISTRATION BLOCK,
LITHGOW,
SATURDAY 3 AUGUST 1974
AUGUST 1974 WILL PROVE AN IMPORTANT
MONTH FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN LITHGOW AND
THROUGHOUT THE NATION, FOR LITHGOW, IT WILL
MEAN THE ACQUISITION OF MODERN OFFICES FROM
WHICH THE COUNCIL CAN ADMINISTER THE AFFAIRS OF
THE CITY. THIS HAS RESULTED ENTIRELY FROM
THE EFFORTS OF THE COUNCIL WHICH RAISED THE
$ 440,000 NECESSARY FOR THE COMPLETION OF WHAT
IT ENVISAGES AS THE FIRST OF THREE PARTS OF
A CIVIC CENTRE FOR LITHGOW, 
-2-
THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS MONTH FOR MUNICIPAL
AND SHIRE COUNCILS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY IS THAT IT
WILL SEE BROUGHT TO FRUITION ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
ADVANCES IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
IN THE NEXT WEEK OR SO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL
RECEIVE THE FIRST REPORT OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION ON
APPLICATIONS BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES FOR
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
LATER IN THE MONTH THE CABINET WILL HAVE THIS REPORT
BY AN INDEPENDENT AND NON-POLITICAL BODY TO GUIDE IT
AS IT DRAFTS THE BUDGET, WHEN THE BUDGET ITSELF IS
BROUGHT DOWN NEXT MONTH IT WILL CONTAIN FOR THE FIRST
TIME GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT DESIGNED TO OVERCOME
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT REGIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
THIS PROCESS REPRESENTS A MAJOR BREAKTHROUGH
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IT RESULTS FROM LEGISLATION
INTRODUCED BY THE GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TO EXPAND THE
FUNCTIONS OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THE COMMISSION
WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1933 TO PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
SPECIAL GRANTS TO BE PAID TO CLAIMANT STATES UNDER
SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION, AT VARIOUS TIMES IN
THE PAST 41 YEARS THESE STATES HAVE INCLUDED QUEENSLAND,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA.
THE BASIS OF MAKING SUCH GRANTS HAS BEEN THE RECOGNITION
THAT AT VARIOUS TIMES SOME STATES HAVE BEEN LESS ADVANTAGED
THAN OTHERS, BOTH IN TERMS OF FINANCE AND SERVICES,
THE COMMISSION HAS SERVED THE PURPOSE OF HELPING TO
REDUCE SUCH INEQUALITIES BETWEEN STATES, / 3 
3
WITH THE PASSAGE OF THE NEW GRANTS COMMISSION
ACT LAST YEAR, THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOW EMPOWERED THE
COMMISSION TO EXAMINE NOT JUST THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
THE STATES BUT ALSO THE INEQUALITIES THAT EXIST BETWEEN
REGIONS IN THE ONE STATE, THIS RECOGNISES THAT, WHILE
A PARTICULAR STATE OVERALL MAY BE IN A HEALTHY FINANCIAL
POSITION, THERE MAY BE AREAS WITHIN IT THAT LACK ADEQUATE
SERVICES AND FACILITIES, THE LOCAL COUNCILS IN SUCH
A REGION MAY LACK THE FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO OVERCOME
THOSE DEFICIENCIES AND EVEN THE STATE GOVERNMENT MAY
NOT BE ABLE TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE HELP, IN FACT IT IS
QUITE OBVIOUS THAT IF THE DISABILITIES OF SOME AREAS
OF AUSTRALIA ARE TO BE OVERCOME THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST PROVIDE SPECIAL GRANTS, THAT WAS THE PRINCIPLE
GUIDING THE GRANTS COMMISSION WHEN. IT BEGAN HEARING
APPLICATIONS FOR SUPPORT FROM REGIONAL GROUPINGS OF
COUNCILS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA EARLY THIS YEAR,
SUCH ASSISTANCE IS LONG OVERDUE IN AUSTRALIA,
Too MUCH OF TIHE PROVISION OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES IN
THIS COUNTRY HAS BEEN LEFT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
NEITHER THE AUSTRALIAN NOR STATE GOVERNMENTS IN THE
PAST HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO
PROVIDE THOSE SERVICES, I. OCA I_ GOVIRNMENT HAS INDEED
BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SINCE THE VERY BEGINNINGS
OF OUR FEDERATION, s, ,/ 4 
-4-
THE FRAMERS OF OUR CONSTITUTION DID NOT EVEN
BOTHER TO MENTION LOCAL GOVERNMENT AT ALLI As LATE
AS 1927, WHEN THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATES WAS DRAWN UP, LOCAL
GOVERNMENT WAS STILL IGNORED, IT WAS NOT UNTIL
1936 THAT THE LOAN COUNCIL BEGAN DEALING WITH THE
BORROWINGS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES. YET
IN ALL THAT TIME THE SCALE OF OPERATIONS OF LOCAL
AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES HAS GROWN MARKEDLY,
THE GROWTH HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY GREAT SINCE THE
WAR, THIS IS IMMEDIATELY OBVIOUS IF WE LOOK AT
THE FIGURES OF COMPARATIVE DEBTS, THE INDEBTEDNESS
OF THE COMMONWEALTH HAS NOT GROWN SINCE THE WAR,
BUT THE DEBTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE MULTIPLIED MORE THAN 12 TIMES.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES ARE NOW BORROWING
MORE EACH YEAR THAN THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THEIR
OUTSTANDING DEBT ONLY 20 YEARS OR SO AGO,
THE COSTS OF SERVICING THEIR BORROWINGS
BEAR HEAVILY ON THE BUDGETS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES, OVERALL INTEREST PAYMENTS BY THE
AUTHORITIES WOULD NOW BE EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 12%
OF THEIR REVENUES, INTEREST PAYMENTS PLUS CAPITAL
REPAYMENTS AMOUNTED TO $ 177,5 MILLION IN 1970/ 71,
EQUIVALENT TO ABOUT 25% OF THEIR REVENUES, 
IF WE NEED FURTHER EVIDENCE OF THE FINANCIAL PLIGHT
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WE NEED ONLY LOOK AT THE RECENT
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AREAS AND ADMINISTRATION IN NEW SOUTH
WALES, KNOWN AS THE BARNETT REPORT. THE COMMITTEE
POINTED OUT THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT'IS SHARE OF TOTAL
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES HAS BEEN SHRINKING STEADILY
IN AUSTRALIA, IN 1969/ 70 IT REPRESENTED 7.14% OF
TOTAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE IN AUSTRALIA, COMPARED
WITH 21.6% IN CANADA, 25.4% IN THE UNITED STATES
AND 34.6% IN GREAT BRITAIN ( WHERE, IT MUST BE
ADMITTED, THERE ARE NO STATE GOVERNMENTS).
YET, WHILE THE FINANCIAL PLIGHT OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT HAS WORSENED, WE LOOK TO IT INCREASINGLY
TO MEET SO MANY OF OUR COMMUNITY NEEDS. INDEED THERE
HAS BEEN A QUITE NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE ACCELERATION
IN THE DEMANDS MADE BY THE COMMUNITY' ON LOCAL
GOVERNMENT, WE LOOK TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE
ROADS, SEWERAGE, RECREATION FACILITIES), HEAL. TH SERVICES
AND PLANNING. IN MOR'E RECENT YEARS WE HAVE EXPECTED
IT TO EXPAND INTO SUCH AREAS) AS HEALTH SERVICES AND
CHILD CARE CENTRES, THE BARNETT REPORT POINTED OUT
THAT, IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES, " THEIR AREAS COULD NOT SURVIVE WITHOUT A
CONTINUANCE OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND,
WITHOUT EXCEPTION, COUNCILS B3ELIEVED THE AUSTRAL-IAN
GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WAS ESSENTIAL, I is 96 
THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENI SHARES lHAF BELIEF
ANrD HAS TRIED TO PUT IT INTO PRACTICE IN IHE LAST
MONTHS. OUR EXPANSION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF 1HL
GRANTS COMMISSION IS A MAJOR EXAMPLE OF THIS. WE
HAVE ALSO UPCRADED THE LEVEL. OF AUSTrRALIAN ( GOVLRNMENT
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN SUCH AREAS AS
ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT, AGED PERSONS HOUSING,
SOCIAL. SERVICES, SEWERAGE AND RECREATION,
UNFORTUNATELY WE HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO ACHIEVE
ALL THAT WE WANTED, LAST YEAR I TWICE ASKED THE
STAT(" PREMIERS TO GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A VOICE AND
A VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL. I FIRST MADE THE REQUEST
AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION IN SYDNEY IN SEPTEMBER.
I TOLD THE CONVENTION:
" I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE OVEtRRIDING
CONSIDERATION IN MANY MINDS HERE RELATES TO THE
FINANCIAL. RELATIONS BETWEEN TirE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE STATES. SOME OF YOU MAY PREFER TO BELILVE THAT
THE OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION IN MY MIND IS TO CONTINUE
AND EVEN COMPOUND THE PRESENT SITUATION BY WHICH THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT DOMINATES THE FINANCIAL RELATIONS
BETWEEN IT AND THE STATES. THAT'S NOT TRUE. MY
OVERRIDING CONSIDERATION AND CONCERN IN THIS CONTEXT IS
TO BALANCE THE FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO ENSURE
ADEQUATE SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENTS OF RESOURCES. / 7
6 
I WISH EACH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT TO BE IN A POSITION TO
PERFORM BETTER ITS ASSIGNED FUNCTIONS, FOR THE BETTER WELFARE
OF ALL OUR CITIZENS, WHEREVER THEY LIVE,"
THE PREMIERS REJECTED MY PROPOSAL. IT WAS FOR THIS REASON
THAT THE GOVERNMENT TOOK THE QUESTION TO REFERENDUM IN MAY THIS
YEAR. WE SOUGHT THE APPROVAL OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE FOR AN
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION TO ALLOW THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO MAKE GRANTS DIRECT TO LOCAL COUNCILS AND TO BORROW MONEY ON
THEIR BEHALF. NO GOVERNMENT HAS EVER FOUND IT EASY TO WIN A
REFERENDUM; NEVERTHELESS THIS REFERENDUM WAS CARRIED IN NEW
SOUTH WALES AND ALMOST CARRIED IN VICTORIA AND WAS SUPPORTED
BY 46,8 PER CENT OF THE ELECTORS IN ALL STATES.
THIS DEFEAT WILL MAKE IT HARDER FOR US TO PURSUE OUR
OBJECTIVES OF UPGRADING LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND IMPROVING ITS
FINANCIAL POSITION. WE WILL HAVE TO CONTINUE TO LIVE WITH
THE CUMBERSOME MACHINERY OF OLD. NEVERTHELESS OUR COMMITMENT
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT REMAINS. WE WANT TO SEE IT TAKE ITS
PROPER PLACE IN OUR THREE-TIERED SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT,
WE WANT TO SEE THAT IT HAS THE FINANCIAL ABILITY TO MEET AS
MANY OF THE DEMANDS THAT ARE MADE UPON IT AS POSSIBLE. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE
BUILDING WORKERS' INDUSTRIAL UNION,
SYDNEY, MONDAY 5 AUGUST 1974
IT IS FITTING THAT THE FIRST PRIME MINISTER
TO OPEN AN ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF YOUR UNION SHOULD
BE A LABOR PRIME MINISTER. YOUR UNION AND YOUR
INDUSTRY ARE ESSENTIAL PARTNERS OF THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN BUILDING LITERALLY BUILDING
THE KIND OF SOCIETY WE SEEK FOR OURSELVES,
FOR THE WORKING MEN AND WOMEN OF THIS COUNTRY,
FOR OUR FAMILIES AND OUR CHILDREN.
I DOUBT IF THERE HAS EVER BEEN A TIME WHEN
THE TRADITIONAL SOLIDARITY BETWEEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT
AND THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT WAS MORE IMPORTANT TO
BOTH OF US, MORE IN NEED OF EMPHASIS AND CONFIRMATION.
TODAY THE HOPES AND PLANS OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT
ARE UNDER ATTACK FROM AN EMBITTERED AND UNSCRUPULOUS
OPPOSITION. WE MUST UNITE TO RESIST THAT ATTACK AND
DEFEAT IT, IF WE FAIL, ALL THE GOVERNMENT'S HOPES
AND AMBITIONS FOR THIS COUNTRY WILL FAIL, ALL OUR PLANS
FOR THE WELFARE AND SECURITY OF THE WORKER WILL FAIL. 
-2-
IT IS TIME FOR CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING,
WE ARE MINDFUL OF WHAT THE UNIONS HAVE DONE TO HELP
ELECT AND SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT, TODAY I ASK YOU
TO REFLECT ON WHAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS DONE AND CAN
DO FOR THE UNIONS, JUST AS WE ARE CONSCIOUS OF YOUR
PROBLEMS, I ASK YOU TO BE CONSCIOUS OF OURS.
IN THE LONG RUN OUR NEEDS AND INTERESTS
ARE THE SAME THE DEVELOPMENT OF A STABLE AND HEALTHY
SOCIETY, THE PRESERVATION OF A STRONG AND EXPANDING
ECONOMY, NO PEACETIME GOVERNMENT, I VENTURE TO
SUGGEST, HAS EVER FACED MORE COMPLEX AND TESTING
PROBLEMS IN ACHIEVING THIS, THE CHALLENGE IS A GLOBAL
ONE, A UNIVERSAL ONE, AT SUCH A TIME WE MUST LOOK TO
OUR TRADITIONAL ALLIES IN THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT
FOR LOYALTY AND SUPPORT. OUR ULTIMATE TASK IS TO
PRESERVE THE UNDERLYING STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY,
OUR IMMEDIATE TASK IS TO RESTRAIN ITS-PRESENT
INFLATIONARY TENDENCIES,
I DO NOT NEED TO REMIND YOU HOW DANGEROUS
AND DESTRUCTIVE INFLATION CAN BE FOR THE WORKER AND
HIS FAMILY, IT CAN DESTROY ALL YOUR EFFORTS AND OURS
TO IMPROVE LIVING STANDARDS AND PROMOTE SECURITY AND
SOCIAL JUSTICE, IT CAN ALSO, AS I SAY, DESTROY THE
GOVERNMENT, 
-3-
THAT IS WHY, FROM THE MOMENT THE GOVERNMENT
WAS ELECTED, IT HAS WORKED UNREMITTINGLY, CEASELESSLY,
TO ATTACK INFLATION AT ITS ROOTS NOT JUST THE
SYMPTOMS, BUT THE CAUSES, AND THAT IS A MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT BUSINESS TO ISOLATE AND ATTACK THE
CAUSES, THE DEEP-SEATED FORCES THAT CREATE WASTE
AND INEFFICIENCY AND HIGH COSTS IN THE ECONOMY,
I CANNOT PRETEND, LIKE MR. SNEDDEN, THAT WE HAVE FOUND
THE MAGIC SOLUTION; BUT WE HAVE TRIED, WE WILL GO ON
TRYING TILL WE WIN THE BATTLE, ALREADY WE HAVE MADE
FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURAL REFORMS IN OUR TARIFFS,
IN OUR METHODS OF ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY, IN OUR
APPROACH TO SUBSIDIES AND THE USE OF MANPOWER.
ALL THESE REFORMS ARE ESSENTIAL TO A LONG-TERM
ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY, THE IMMEDIATE BATTLEI
HOWEVER, IS STILL FAR FROM WON, AND IN THAT BATTLE
EVERY SECTION OF THE COMMUNITY MUST PLAY A PART AND,
IF NECESSARY, ACCEPT SOME MEASURE OF SACRIFICE, 
THE TRADITIONAL CYCLE OF BOOM AND STAGNATION
IN THE ECONOMY, SO MUCH A FEATURE OF LIBERAL ECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT, HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY MARKED IN YOUR OWN
INDUSTRY, IN THE PAST 13 YEARS THERE HAVE BEEN THREE
DISTINCT BOOMS AND THREE SEVERE DOWNTURNS IN THE
BUILDING TRADE. IN JUNE 1972, AT THE TIME OF THE LAST
RECESSION IN THE INDUSTRY, THERE WERE 230 UNEMPLOYED
FOR EVERY 100 REGISTERED VACANCIES IN THE SKILLED
BUILDING TRADES, THIS IS AN INTOLERABLE RECORD OF
WASTE, INSTABILITY AND HARDSHIP, OUR TASK AS A
GOVERNMENT IS TO TRY TO REDUCE THESE FLUCTUATIONS, TO
KEEP THE INDUSTRY AT FULL EMPLOYMENT LEVELS AND
MAINTAIN A RATE OF GROWTH THAT WILL ENABLE IT TO
SUPPLY US WITH THE HOUSES, OFFICES, SCHOOLS AND
HOSPITALS REQUIRED BY OUR GROWING POPULATION. I AM
CONFIDENT THAT WE CAN ACHIEVE THIS, BUT WE WILL
ACHIEVE IT ONLY WITH YOUR SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION-
LET ME FIRST SAY SOMETHING ABOUT THE PROBLEM
OF INFLATION AS IT BEARS ON YOUR OWN INDUSTRY, NO
GOVERNMENT CAN HOPE TO CONTROL INFLATION WHEN, IN A
FULLY-STRETCHED ECONOMY, BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS ARE SO FLUSH WITH FUNDS THAT THEY ARE
ABLE TO SUPPORT AN EXCESSIVE DEMAND FOR GOODS AND
SERVICES, THE OLD STORY TOO MUCH MONEY CHASING
TOO FEW GOODS APPLIES WITH UNIQUE FORCE TO THE
BUILDING INDUSTRY, THE PRESENT TIGHT'LIQUIDITY
AND HIGH INTEREST RATES ARE A RESULT OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S DETERMINATION TO CONTROL AND REDUCE
INFLATION, WE SHALL NOT CAPITULATE, WE SHALL NOT
WAVER FROM THIS POLICY TO ACHIEVE SOME SHORT-LIVED
POPULARITY, NOBODY LIKES A TIGHT MONETARY POLICY,
LEAST OF ALL A LABOR GOVERNMENT, BUT IT IS
NECESSARY FOR THE PRESENT TO KEEP MONEY TIGHT TO
RESTRAIN PRIVATE SECTOR SPENDING, AS I TOLD THE
PREMIERS ON 7 JUNE:
" VIE ARE FOLLOWING SUCH A MONETARY POLICY,
NOT BECAUSE WE LIKE ITS CONSEQUENCES IN
TERMS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY AND HIGHER
INTEREST RATES, BUT BECAUSE WE HAVE TO
IF THERE IS TO BE A CURB ON EXCESSIVE
PRIVATE SPENDING. I 
-6-
WITHIN THAT OVER-RIDING POLICY OBJECTIVE,
HOWEVER, THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT THE ESSENTIAL
NEEDS OF THE ECONOMY FOR FINANCE MUST BE MET. WE
WILL CERTAINLY NOT PERMIT ANY GENERAL DOWNTURN IN THE
BUILDING INDUSTRY, WE WANT TO SEE THAT MONEY AND
CREDIT ARE AVAILABLE TO FINANCE ORDERLY ECONOMIC
EXPANSION, WITH THAT IN MIND, WE HAVE, IN THE PAST
TWO MONTHS, RELEASED ADDITIONAL FUNDS TOTALLING
ALMOST $ 349 MILLION, IN ADDITION, FURTHER FUNDS
HAVE BEEN FREED TO HELP THE MAJOR TRADING BANKS
MAKE LOANS TO INDUSTRY, COMMERCE AND RURAL PRODUCERS,
FOR ALL THAT, I MUST SAY FRANKLY THAT A
GENERALLY RESTRICTIVE MONETARY POLICY WILL NEED TO
BE MAINTAINED FOR SOME TIME IF EXCESSIVE DEMAND
PRESSURES ARE TO BE CURBED AND INFLATION BROUGHT UNDER
CONTROL, IF MONETARY POLICY SOUGHT TO PREVENT A
RISE IN INTEREST RATES WHEN DEMANDS FOR CREDIT WERE
BOOMING, MONEY AND CREDIT WOULD EXPAND EXPLOSIVELY,
WITH DEVASTATING EFFECTS ON PRICES, IN THE END,
ANY SUCH POLICY WOULD PROVE FUTILE, OBVIOUSLY THERE
ARE SOME COSTS TO THE COMMUNITY INVOLVED IN OUR
PRESENT RESTRAINTS. BUT WOULD-BE HOME BUYERS, THOSE
ON FIXED INCOMES, EXPORTERS AND THE COMMUNITY
GENERALLY WOULD SUFFER MUCH MORE IF INFLATION WERE
ALLOWED TO RUN UNCHECKED, 
-7-
IT IS NOW CLEAR THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S MONETARY
POLICIES ARE BEGINNING TO STABILISE THE PRICE OF
HOUSES. AFTER INCREASING BY 20 PER CENT OR MORE DURING
THE PAST YEAR, THERE ARE NOW ALMOST DAILY REPORTS
THAT HOUSE PRICES ARE LEVELLING OUT AND, IN SOME CASES,
FALLING, OBVIOUSLY IT WOULD SERVE NO WORTHWHILE
PURPOSE TO INCREASE THE SUPPLY OF HOUSING FINANCE WHEN
THE HOUSING INDUSTRY IS OVER-STRETCHED, AS IT HAS
BEEN DURING THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS, ADDITIONAL
FINANCE DOES NOT BUILD MORE HOUSES: IT SIMPLY ADDS
TO INFLATIONARY PRESSURES, TO THE DISADVANTAGE OF ALL
POTENTIAL HOME-BUYERS, NOR DOES IT CREATE MORE JOBS
OR PROMOTE THE SECURITY OF THE BUILDING WORKER. YET
THE FACT IS THAT IN THE YEAR TO THE MARCH QUARTER
1971 THE LATEST PERIOD FOR WHICH STATISTICS ARE
AVAILABLE MORE DWELLINGS WERE APPROVED, COMMENCED
AND COMPLETED THAN EVER BEFORE. AT THE END OF
MARCH THERE WERE OVER 100,000 DWELLINGS ! INDER
CONSTRUCTION. THIS REPRESENTED AN INCREASE OF
PER CENT COMPARED W! TH A YEAR EARLIER AND
54 PER CENT COMPARED WITH 1972, 
-8-
THIS BACKLOG OF WORK REFLECTS MAINLY THE
ENORMOUS INCREASE OF 44 PER CENT IN THE NUMBER OF
HOUSING LOANS APPROVED IN 1972/ 73. IT HAS SERVED TO
MAINTAIN ACTIVITY IN THE INDUSTRY AT A VERY HIGH
LEVEL IN THE JUNE QUARTER. STATISTICAL DATA AND
INDUSTRY REPORTS SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT WHILE
LABOUR FOR FINISHING TRADES AND CERTAIN MATERIALS AND
APPLIANCES ARE STILL IN SHORT SUPPLY, PRESSURES
ON THE INDUSTRY HAVE BEGUN TO EASE,
THIS IS TO BE WELCOMED. THE BIG PROBLEM
IN THE PAST YEAR HAS BEEN ONE OF EXCESSIVE DEMAND
FOR RESOURCES. THE RESULTING STRAINS HAVE BEEN
A. LL TOO EVIDENT IN DELAYS, ESCALATING PRICES AND
A REDUCTION IN PUBLIC SECTOR WELFARE HOUSING,
OUR MEASURES HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO MODERATE THESE
EXCESSIVE DEMAND PRESSURES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR
AND TO PROVIDE SCOPE FOR AN EXPANSION OF PUBLIC
SECTOR HOUSING, THESE OBJECTIVES ARE NOW BEING
ACHIEVED, CONTRACTORS ARE AGAIN SHOWING AN INTEREST
IN TENDERING FOR PUBLIC HOUSING, AT THE SAME TIME WE
HAVE INCREASED OUR ALLOCATIONS TO THE STATES TO PREVENT
ANY UNDUE REDUCTION IN THE DWELLING CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRY AS A WHOLE, ADVANCES TO THE STATES FOR
WELFARE HOUSING IN 1974-75 WILL TOTAL $ 235 MILLION
A RECORD FOR ANY GOVERNMENT, AND WE HAVE UNDERTAKEN
TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR WELFARE HOUSING IF
THE STATES CAN USE THEM PRODUCTIVELY 
-9-
I WANT TO DEAL TODAY WITH TWO SPECIFIC PROPOSALS
OF DIRECT IMPORTANCE TO YOUR MEMBERS, THE FIRST OF
THEM, WE BELIEVE, WILL SERVE A TRIPLE PURPOSE IN
RESTRAINING INFLATION, REDUCING INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES AND
PROMOTING THE WELL-BEING AND SECURITY OF WAGE AND SALARY
EARNERS, AS MY COLLEAGUE CLYDE CAMERON HAS ANNOUNCED,
THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE SUPPORTING A POLICY OF WAGE
INDEXATION AT NEXT WEEK'S CONFERENCE CALLED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION,
MR JUSTICE MOORE. OUR INTENTION IS TO RESTORE QUARTERLY
AUTOMATIC COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS TO WAGES,
I DO NOT SUGGEST FOR A MOMENT THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
SOLE OBLIGATION TO THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT IS TO
COMPENSATE WAGE EARNERS FOR INCREASES IN THE COST OF
LIVING, OR THAT SUCH ADJUSTMENTS SHOULD BE THE LIMIT
OF THE WAGE-EARNER'S EXPECTATIONS. WE SEE INDEXATION
AS ONE OF A SERIES OF WAGE PROPOSALS, WE WOULD HOPE
THAT, IN RETURN FOR INDEXATION, UNIONS WOULD FORGO ANY
WAGE CLAIMS BASED SOLELY ON PRICE MOVEMENTS AND THAT
FURTHER WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES THOSE OF GENUINE
SUBSTANCE AND LONG-TERM VALUE WOULD BE BASED LARGELY
ON PRODUCTIVITY, OR CHANGES IN WORK VALUE OR CONDITIONS
THESE CHANGES WOULD BE MADE PRINCIPALLY THROUGHI
DETERMINATIONS OF THE COMMISSION. WE WANT TO RESTORE
THE AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION WE WANT IT ONCE
AGAIN TO BE THE MAJOR INFLUENCE ON WAGE MOVEMENTS
IN THIS COUNTRY, 
I HAVE TO TELL YOU FRANKLY THAT REPEATED WAGE
RISES OF THE ORDER OF 15 OR 20 PER CENT OR MORE ARE
INSUPPORTABLE IN PRESENT ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES, WE ALL
KNOW, OF COURSE, WHY SUCH CLAIMS HAVE BEEN MADE AND,
IN MOST CASES, WHY THEY HAVE BEEN GRANTED. THEY HAVE
BEEN MADE, NOT MERELY TO COMPENSATE WORKERS FOR PRICE
RISES THAT HAVE ALREADY OCCURRED, BUT TO PROTECT THEM
AGAINST RISES WHICH THEY ANTICIPATE IN THE FUTURE. IT
IS OUR HOPE THAT INDEXATION WILL REMOVE THE NEED
AND THE INCENTIVE FOR SUCH CLAIMS. WHEN WORKERS KNOW
THAT THEY WILL BE AUTOMATICALLY COMPENSATED AS
THEY HAVE A RIGHT TO BE FOR INCREASES IN THE COST
OF LIVING, THEY WILL BE ABLE TO DIRECT THEIR WAGE
NEGOTIATIONS TO QUESTIONS OF REAL AND LASTING
IMPORTANCE TO THEIR WELFARE AND THEIR INDUSTRY.
SOME MODERATION IN THE SCALE OF WAGE CLAIMS WILL
HAVF SIGNIFICANT LONG-TERM ANTI-INFLATIONARY EFFECTS. 
-11-
WHAT A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OUR ATTITUDE AND
THAT OF OUR OPPONENTS, THE LAST TIME WORKERS NEEDED
THIS PROTECTION AGAINST PRICE INCREASES IN THE EARLY
1950S THE LIBERALS DEPRIVED THEM OF IT, THEY REMOVED
QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENTS WITHOUT SUBSTITUTING ANY
GUARANTEE AGAINST THE ERODING EFFECTS OF THE COST OF
LIVING, 11O WONDER THERE WAS A WAVE OF INDUSTRIAL
UNREST, WE HAVE STRONG HOPES THAT OUR PROPOSALS WILL
REDUCE THE INCIDENCE OF WORKING DAYS LOST THROUGH
STRIKES, IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE FIGURES FOR
WORKING DAYS LOST THIS YEAR ARE THE HIGHEST FOR MANY
YEARS, YET 71.3 PER CENT OF THE STRIKES IN MAY
AND JUNE THIS YEAR WERE DUE TO DISPUTES OVER WAGES,
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF THOSE WERE DUE TO WAGE DEMANDS
REVOLVING AROUND PRICE MOVEMENTS, SO,* IN OUR VIEW,
QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENTS ARE QUITE CRITICAL TO BOTH GOOD
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS AND THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION,
WE HAVE CERTAINLY BEEN ENCOURAGED BY THE CO-OPERATION
AND GOODWILL SHOWN BY THE MAJOR UNIONS, 
-12-
ICOME NOW TO A SECOND PROPOSAL OF HISTORIC
IMPORTANCE TO THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT AND THE FUTURE
STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY ON 17 JULY MR. CAMERON
TABLED IN PARLIAMENT THE REPORT OF THE COCHRANE COMMITTEE
OF INQUIRY INTO LABOUR MARKET TRAINI* NG.' MR. CAMERON'
SUBMISSION TO CABINET ON RETRAINING -BASED ON THE
COCHRANE REPORT RECOMMENDED THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SYSTEM ( NEAT),
THIS PROPOSAL WAS APPROVED BY CABINET ON 8 JULY, I
PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR UNION FOR ITS READINESS TO JOIN THE
SCHEME AND CO-OPERATE WITH THE GOVERNMENT IN MAKING IT
A SUCCESS. THE OPPORTUNITIES MADE AVAILABLE UNDER NEAT
WILL BE AVAILABLE EQUALLY TO WOMEN AND MEN. WE SEE
THE SCHEME AS PART OF A GENERAL MANPOWER POLICY TO
IMPROVE THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
OF ALL WORKERS, PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO FIND THAT THEIR
OPPORTUNITIES AND ASPIRATIONS ARE THWARTED BY AN
INADEQUATE EDUCATION.
IEMPHASISE THAT THE SCHEME IS NO MERE SHOR-r-TERM
PALLIATIVE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT. ITr WILL COVER A WIDE
RANGE OF SKILLS, AND WHILE IT WILL BE PpOMPT AND FLEXIBLE
IN RELIEVING SHORT-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT, ITS CHIEF AIM WILL
BE TO RESTRUCTURE THE WORK FORCE TO ENABLE CO-ORDINATION
BETWEEN THE SUPPLY OF ALL TYPES OF LABOUR. 
-13-
THE SCHEME WILL FULFIL THIS GOAL BY ASSISTING PEOPLE WHOSE
CAREERS HAVE BEEN EITHER CIRCUMSCRIBED OR CURTAILED BY
CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF THE LABOUR REQUIREMENTS OF
INDUSTRY, BY STRUCTURAL CHANGES WITHIN INDIVIDUAL
INDUSTRIES OR THROUGHOUT THE ECONOMY, BY CHANGES IN
DEMAND BY TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, BY GOVERNMENT POLICIES
OR CHANGES IN THE ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF CERTAIN
GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS, IT WILL HELP PEOPLE DEVELOP NEW
SKILLS RELEVANT TO THE NEEDS OF MODERN INDUSTRY,
IT WILL AIM AT IMPROVING THE LEVEL OF SKILLS WITHIN
THE WORKFORCE AND THE QUALITY OF LABOUR AVAILABLE
TO INDUSTRY, FURTHERMORE, IT WILL ENCOURAGE THE CONCEPT
OF CONTINUING TRAINING THROUGHOUT AN INDIVIDUAL'S
WORKING LIFE SO THAT HIS SKILLS WILL REMAIN RELEVANT
TO THE NEEDS OF SOCIETY,
NEAT AIMS PRIMARILY AT PROVIDING FOR THE
TRAINING NEEDS OF ADULTS, IT WILL GRANT TRAINING
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FOLLOWING ORDER OF PRIORITIES: 
-14-
i1 ANY PERSONS RENDERED REDUNDANT
BY GOVERNMENT POLICIES,
2, PERSONS RENDERED REDUNDANT BY
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES,
3, PERSONS WHOSE EMPLOYMENT POTENTIAL
HAS BEEN AFFECTED BY HEALTHI
IMPRISONMENT OR INAPPROPRIATE
WORK SKILLS,
4, PERSONS WHOSE TRAINING WILL OFFSET
SHORTAGES OF SPECIFIC SKILLS,
PERSONS WISHING TO UPGRADE THEIR
TRAINING ON THEIR OWN INITIATIVE.
THE SCHEME WILL ENDEAVOUR TO PROVIDE A TRAINING
PROGRAM FOR EVERY APPLICANT IN LINE WITH HIS ASPIRATIONS
AND HIS ABILITY TO COMPLETE A COURSE OF TRAINING IN
NEEDED SKILLS, THE TRAINING ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE
SUFFICIENTLY FLEXIBLE TO GIVE WHATEVER PRELIMINARY
OR PREPARATORY TUITION IS NECESSARY TO ALLOW ENTRY
INTO STANDARD TRAINING PROGRAMS, THERE WILL BE
FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME TRAINING IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS, INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE, AND CORRESPONDENCE
TUITION WHERE APPROPRIATE, 
THE FULL-TIME TRAINING ALLOWANCES WILL BE EQUAL
TO THE AVERAGE ADULT MALE AWARD WAGE FOR ALL ADULT TRAINEES
AND FOR THOSE UNDER 21 WITH DEPENDENTS, WITH A SLIDING
SCALE OF ALLOWANCES FOR TRAINEES BELOW 21 DOWN TO
PER CENT OF THE RATE FOR THOSE UNDER 18, ALLOWANCES
WILL BE PROVIDED WHERE NECESSARY FOR FARES, TUITION AND
EXAMINATION FEES, BOOKS AND LIVING AWAY-FROM-HOME EXPENSES,
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE MEASURES WE HAVE BROUGHT
FORWARD TO BRING WAGE JUSTICE AND WIDER OPPORTUNITIES
TO TRADE UNION MEMBERS, THERE ARE OTHERS STILL IN
THEIR EARLY STAGES,
EVERY ONE OF OUR MEASURES WILL BENEFIT THE
WORKING MAN AND WOMAN, THE WAGE EARNER, THE UNIONIST,
WE ARE EXAMINING SCHEMES FOR NATIONAL COMPENSATION AND
REHABILITATION ON THE BASIS OF THE REPORT BY MR, JUSTICE
EA. WOODHOUSE, WE ARE COMMITTED TO A NATIONAL SUPERANNUATION
SCHEME FOR ALL EMPLOYEES, WE ARE PLEDGED TO ESTABLISH AN
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE, OUR RESTRUCTURING
OF THE TAX SCALES WILL TAKE ACCOUNT OF THE NEEDS OF
LOWER-PAID WORKERS, OUR PLANS FOR CHILD CARE YES$
CHILD CARE WILL GIVE A NEW DEAL TO THE WORKING MOTHER,
IT IS TRUE THAT THESE PLANS HAVE BEEN BRIEFLY DEFERRED
OUT OF ECONOMIC NECESSITY, THE FACT REMAINS THAT WE WILL
BE SPENDING MORE ON ESSENTIAL CHILD CARE SERVICES THAN
EVER BEFORE, IT WILL BE AN IMPROVED AND ENLARGED CHILD
CARE SCHEME, 
-1.6-
I REJECT UTTERLY THE CYNICAL OPPORTUNISM OF AN
OPPOSITION THAT ACCUSES US OF NEGLECTING MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN WHEN FOR YEARS THEIR OWN NIGGARDLY CHILD CARE
PLANS CONDEMNED THOUSANDS OF WORKING MOTHERS TO HARDSHIP.
THE DIFFERENCE IS SIMPLY THIS: THEY DID NEXT TO NOTHING
AND PROMISED NEXT TO NOTHING, WE ARE PLEDGED TO A MASSIVE
AND FUNDAMENTAL CHILD CARE PROGRAM.
I CANNOT CONCEAL FROM YOU I CANNOT EMPHASISE TOO
MUCH THAT THE SUCCESS OF ALL THESE PLANS DEPENDS ON
THE MAINTENANCE OF A STRONG, HEALTHY ECONOMY. THAT IS
WHY WE MUST CO-OPERATE IN THE BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION.
THAT IS WHY WE MUST STAND TOGETHER, WORK TOGETHER,
TO RESIST THE SABOTAGE AND OBSTRUCTION OF THE OPPOSITION.
LET ME GIVE YOU ONE EXAMPLE OF THIS PETTY AND VICIOUS
OBSTRUCTIONISM THAT CONCERNS THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT.
WE HAVE INTRODUCED A CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION BILL.
IT WILL, AMONG OTHER THINGS, FACILITATE THE MAKING OF
INDUSTRIAL AGREEMENTS. IT WAS PART OF OUR POLICY; IT
WAS APPROVED BY THE I'OPFLE; IT IS SUPPORTED BY THE UNIONS
AND THE EMPLOYERS. YET THE OPPOSITION WILL OPPOSE IT.
WHAT SORT OF DEMOCRACY IS THAT? YOU WANT IT; THE
EMPLOYERS WANT IT; THE PEOPLE WANT IT. BUT THE
OPPOSITION SAYS NO, 
-17-
You SHOULD HAVE NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT THE CHOICE
BEFORE YOU, IT IS SOMETIMES TEMPTING FOR PROFESSIONAL
UNIONLEADERS TO TAKE THE CYNICAL VIEW THAT ONE
GOVERNMENT IS AS GOOD AS ANOTHER, THE FACT IS THAT
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE WELFARE
OF WORKING MEN AND WOMEN THAN ANY GOVERNMENT IN OUR
HISTORY, EVERY DECISION WE HAVE TAKEN, EVERY PRIORITY
WE HAVE ADOPTED, HAS BEEN DIRECTED TO THE BENEFIT OF
THOSE MOST IN NEED, TO THE CARE OF THE WEAK AND VULNERABLE
SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND TO THE CREATION OF WIDER
AND MORE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL OUR CITIZENS,
THE AUSTRALIAN WORKER TODAY IS BETTER OFF THAN
HE HAS EVER BEEN NOT JUST IN MATERIAL TERMS, IMPORTANT
AS THAT IS, BUT IN THE RANGE AND QUALITY OF SOCIAL
OPPORTUNITIES WE HAVE OPENED UP FOR HIM. REMEMBER
ALL WE HAVE DONE FOR EDUCATION EDUCATION AT EVERY
LEVEL; FOR SOCIAL SECURITY; FOR AUSTRALIA'S
REPUTATION IN THE WORLD, REMEMBER ALL WE HAVE DONE
FOR MIGRANTS, WHO ARE SUCH A SIGNIFICANT PROPORTION OF
YOUR MEMBERSHIP, 
-1 8c
WHERE WOULD WE BE TODAY IF THE LIBERALS HAD
STILL BEEN IN POWER SINCE 1972? WE WOULD BE REELING UNDER
THE WORST AND CRUDEST KINDS OF ANTI-INFLATIONARY ACTION:
MASSIVE UNEMPLOYMENT AN NUTILSANTO. OUR
YOUNG WORKERS WOULD STILL BE SUBJECT TO CONSCRIPTION.
OUR SCHOOLS WOULD STILL BE IMPOVERISHED AND DEVOID OF
HOPE. PRICES, UNCHECKED BY OUR TRIBUNAL, WOULD BE FAR
HIGHER THAN THEY ARE NOW, OUR DOLLAR WOULD STILL BE
UNDERVALUED. OUR INDUSTRIES AND RESOURC. ES WOULD STILL
BE VULNERABLE TO FOREIGN TAKEOVER AND CONTROL. THE WHOLE
SINISTER APPARATUS OF PENAL CLAUSES AND ANTI-UNION
PROPAGANDA WOULD BE IN FULL STRIDE, INTIMIDATING THE
WORKER AND THREATENING THE UNION4S WITH PENALTIES AND
RESTRAINTS. OUR OPPONENTS KNOW THIS, THEY BITTERLY RESENT WHAT
WE ARE DOING TO MODERNISE AND DEMOCRATISE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,
How INCREDIBLE IT IS, HOW MONSTROUS, THAT LESS THAN THREE
MONTHS AFTER A GENERAL ELECTION THE TWO-TIME LOSERS SHOULD
STILL BE RESISTING THE UMPIRE'IS DECISION, STILL CLINGING
TO A PATHETIC BELIEF IN THEIR GOD-GIVEN RIGHT TO RULE,
IAPPEAL TO YOU TO STAND BESIDE THE GOVERNMENT YOU ELECTED.
IAPPEAL TO YOU TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN ALL WE ARE DOING1
TO MOBILIZE THE POWER AND RESOURCES OF~ THE TRADE UNION
MOVEMENT IN RESISTING THE SABOTAGE OF THE OPPOSITION AND
EXPOSING THEIR HYPOCRISY AND DECEIT. LET ' THIS CONFERENCE,
WHICH I NOW HAVE PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN, BE THE FIRST
MOVE IN THI'S DRIVE TO CONFIRM G'JIR SOLIDARITY, TO RESTORE
OUR DETERMI'NATION AND RENEW OUR HOPES FOR THE FUTURE. 



SPFCI BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR F. G, WHIHLAP, M. P.,
TO THE ITALIAN CU0rrBER OF COMMERCE -SYDNEY, MONDAY, 12 AUGUST 1974i
THERE ARE FEW COUNtRIES WITH WHIcH AUSTRALIA HAS
HAD LONGER CONTACT THAT IT HAS HAT) WITNi ITALY,, THIS CONTACT.
PROBABLY EXTENDS AS FAR BACK AS CAPTAIN CoOK1'' S VOYAGE To AUSTRALIA
IN 1770, AB3OARUJ THE " ENDEAVOUIR" WAS ANTONIO PONTO, THOUGHT TO
HAVE BEEN A. VENETIArNi THERE WAS AN ITALIAN NAMED TU70 IN THE
FIRST FLEET, THOUGH WE ARE NOT SURE IN WHAT CAPACITY HE CAME
To AuSTRALIAI DURaNG-THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ITALIAN MIGRANTS.
ARRIVFED IN AUSTRALIA IN SMALL BUT GROWING NUMBERS, PARTICULARLY
AFTER THE IMPE7US PRQVfDED BY THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE
2850' S. INDEED THE GOLD RUSH C: AUSED THE INVOLVEMENT OF ONE
ITALIAN IN ONE OF THE MIOST CRUCIAL INCIDENTS IN AnsTRALIAN
HISTORY, RAFFAELLO CARBONI WAS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADER~ S
AT THE EUREKA STOCKADE IN 185i-
THE ITALIAN MEN AND WOMEN HHO CAME To AUSTRALIA
CONTRIBUTED GREATLYi TO OUR WAY OF LIF'E. WE OWE MUCH 10 THE
ITA. LIAN CANEGROWERS IN NORTH OUENSLAND, TO THE ITALIAN GOLD)
MIlNERS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE ITALIAN TOBACCO GROWERS IN
SOUTH-WEST OESTERN AUSTRALIA AnD V/ ICTORIA AND THE FRUIT AND
\ E(; ETABLE GROWERS IN THE IRRIG3ATION AREAS OF THE MURRAY AND
PURRUMBIDGEE RIVERS OF NEW SOUTH WAI-ES AND VICTORIA. 
2-
THE POST-WAR MIGRATION BOOM LED TO AN EVEN GREATER
INFLUX OF MIGRANTS FROM ITALY. THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY 13
NOW THE BIGGEST OF THE NONt-ENGLIqlH NATIONAL GROUPS IN AUSTRALIA.
FROM 1945 To DECEMBER 1973, 164,863 ITALIANS HAVE BECOME
AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS. THE 1971 CENSUS SHOWED THAT MORE THAN
289,000 AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS WERE BORN IN ITALY AND IT IS
ESTIMATED THAT FROM 19' 46 TO 1972 MORE THAN 257, OOO of CHILDREN
BORN JN AUSTRALIA HAl) AT LEASI ONE PARENT WHO WAS BORN IN
o ITALY. THIS DRAMATIC INFUSION O'F ITALIANS HAS HAD A GREAT
IMPAC7 ONi AUF3TRALIAN SOCIETY. IT HAS SIGNIFICANTLY CHANGED
OUR WAY OF L114, ESPECIALLY IN OUR CITIES, SUCH PROJECTS AS
THE SNOWY MIOUNTAINS HYDRO-ELLCTR1C SCHEME WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN
rPosSIBI. IF WITHOUT ITALIAN RIGGERS AND ENGINEERS, INCLUDfNG
MIR JIM BA' 1UTTI. THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS HAD A VERY REAL
INFLUENCE IN THE SMALL BUSINESS FIELD AS WELL AS [ N LARGER
ENTERPRISLS, SUCH As TRANSFIFHP CORPORATION, [ rHE BUSINES
CULTURAL AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES OF THE ONE MILLION AUSTRALIANS
OF ITALIAN BIRTIH, EXTRACTION OR DESCENT HAVE MADE THE ITALIAN
COMMUNITY KA' OST SUCCESSEFULLY I NTECRATED. NATI ONAL GROUP, ON4LY
THE 13f-TIS-K ISLES HAVE MADE A LA4GER CONTRIBUTION ' 10 THE
AUSTRALIAN NATION ANll SOC)[ 1Y, WE HAVE RECU4TLY' RECOGNISEL)
THIS WITH THE APPOINTMENT OF DR-, EVASJO) COSTANZO TO THE-AUSTRALIA
COUNCIL AND MR CLAUDE ALCORSO TO THE UINVERSITIES COMMtISSION.
ITALIANS ARE NOT SIMPLY CONCERNING THEMSELV'ES WITH MIGRANT
MATTERS, BUT 11ITH THE AFFAIRSId OF OUJR WHOLE SOCIETY. 
-3
TRADE BETWqEEN ITALY ANDr AuS7RAIA HAS ADDED
SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE CONTAC7 BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES,
ITALY WAS OUR NINTH LARGEST MARKET IN 1972/ 1973. AUSTRALIAN
EXPORTS TO ITALY AMOUNTED TO $ 133 MIlLLION ) N THAT YEAR,
THESE EXPORTS HAVE INCLUDED GREASY WOOL, SHEEP AND LAMB SKINS,
IRON OREo COAL AND PIG [ RON IN TURN AUSTRALIA HAS BENEFITTED
FROM THE IMPORT OF ITALIAN GOODS, PARTICULARLY MACHINERY,
IN THE AREA OF CONSUMER GOODs. AUSTRALIANS H4AVE BEEN ABLE
TO EXPERIEN4CL THE EXCELLENCE OF ITALIAN DESIGN, UNSURPASSED
THROUGHOUT THE WORLDI
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT REMAINS OPTIMISTIC ABOUT
FUTURE TRADE PROSPECTS WITH ITrALY. IAM AWARE, OF COURSE9,
THAT IN MAY THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED A NUMBER OF MEASURES
AIMED AT CORRECTING THE GROSS D[ SEQUIL13RlIUM 11N ' HE ITALIAN
0 ECONOMY. [ HESE MEASURES INCLUDED A PRIOR D) EPOSJTr SYSTEM FOR
IMPORTS WHICH BECAME OPERATIVE ON 7 MlAY AND PRIMARILY AFFECTED
PROCESSED OR MANUFACTURED ITEMS, FORTUNATELY FOR OUR TRADE,
M4ORE THAN TWO-THIRDS OF AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS TO ITALY ARE
EXEMPT FROM THE PRIO. R DEPOSIT SYSTEM, THIS APPLIES PARTICULARLY
TO COAL, RAW WOOL, METAL ORES AND PIG [ RON, AUSTRALIA HAS
MOVED TO ENSURE THAT THERE IS A CONTINUING AND HEALTHY TRADE
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES, Otq 3 MIAY THE M1INISTER FOR OVERSEAS
TRADE, DR CWkNS, ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF THE
ITALO-AuSTRALIAN ' fRADE AD~ viS. ORY COMMITTEE TO PROMOTE THE
DEVELOPMENTr OF COMMERCIAL RELATIONS BE'TWEEN AUSTRALIA AND ITALY,
lHE COMMITTEE WAS FORMED BY A GROUP OF ITALIAN AND AwmTALIAN
BUSINESSMEN ' TO PROMOTE CO-OPERATION AND STREAMLINE
BETWEEN THEC BIJSIIESS COMMUNITIES OF BOJH COUNTRIES, 1. 
THERE IS ONE AREA OF POSSIBLE TRADE WHICH I KNOW
IS OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO ITALY AN) ITALIANS, I REFER TO THE
SALE OF AUSTRALIAN URANIUM SUPPLIES, As MANY OF YOU WOULD
BE AWARE, THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT INSTRUMENTALITY, ENTE
NAZIONALE IDROCARBURI ( ENI) BEGAN NEGOT] ATIONS IN APRIL 1973
WITH PEKO MINES AND ELCCTROLYTIC ZINC FOR AN INTEREST IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RANGER URANIUM DEPOSIT. ENI's AGREEMENT
WITH THE RANGER PARTNERS CONTEMPLATED A 10% INTEREST IN THE
0 PROPOSED VENTURE. CLEARLY SUCH AN INTEREST WOULD CREATE
DIFFICULTIES . N VIEN OF THE GOVERNMENTIS OBJECTIVE OF FULL
410 AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP IN URANIUM DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS, I
OUTLINED THE GOVERNMENT' S BROAD APPROACH TO THE SUBJECT WHEN
I SPOKE AT THE AUSTRALIA-JAPAN MIJNISTERIAL COMMITEE MEETING
IN TOKYO ON 29 OCTOBER LAST YEAR, I SAID THIS:
" THERE ARE CERTAIN ) NDUSTRIES WHERE WE REGARD
AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF PARlICULAR IMPORTANCE,
THESE RELATE ESPECIALLY TO SOURCES OF ENERGY WHERE GROWING
WORLD SHOR7AGES AND OTHER FACTORS MAKE THIS ESSENTIAL, URANIUM
IS ONE OF THESE ENERGY SOURCES AND WE HAVE AN OBJECTIVE OF
FULL AUSTRALIAN OWNERSHIP IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS INVOLVING
URANIUM 1 1
." WE RECOGNISE, HOWEVER, THAT AUSTRALIA'S RESOURCES
OF CAPITAL AND TECHNOLOGY ARE RELATIVELY LIMITED, THAT THE SIZE
OF THE PROJECTS TO BE UNDERTAKEN IS OFTEN VERY GREAT AND THAT
WE SHALL NEED TO CALL UPON OVERSEAS EXPERTISE, TECHNOLOGY
AND CAPITAL TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF THESE
VITAL ENERGY RESOURCES, [ THUS WHILE WE SEEK TO REQUIRE EQUITY
IN NEW PROJECTS INVOLVING THESE MINERALS TO BE IN
AUSTRALIAN HANDS WE DO LOOK FOR OVERSEAS PARTICI'ATION IN SOME
WAYS: THROUGH ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY, LOANS AND ESPECIALLY
m y o lA. d i
I 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS NOTED THAT ENI HAS
STATED THAT, IN CARRYING OUT ITS STATUTORY FUNCTION TO PROCURE
ENERGY RESOURCES FOR ITALY, IT SEEKS TO OPERATE IN A MANNER
CONSISIENT WITH THE POLICIES OF HOST NATIONS, IN TURN tHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THE IMPORTANCE OF URANIUM
S TO A COUN1RY LIKE ITALY WHICH HAS BEEN SO PROFOUNDLY AFFECTED
BY THE ENERGY CRISIS, WHILL WE MUST SAFEGUARD OUR NATIONAL
INTERESTS WE ACKNOWLEDGE THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIIA AND ITALY AS
GOOD TRADING PARTINERS, IN KEEPING WITH THAT TRADITION, W/ E WILL
S. NSURE THAT ITALY WILL GET A PROPER PROPORTION OF ALL THE
URAdIUiM WE HAVE TO EXPORT. 
THE QUESTION OF THE EXPLOITATION C) F URANIUM RAISES
71H1 BROADER ISSUE OF FOREIGN ' INVESTMENT IN A\ USTRALIA,
I KNOW THERE IS A CONTINUING INTEREST AMONG MANY HERE TODAY
IN THE POSSIBILITY' OF '. JOINT. VENTURES BETWEEN ITALIAN
ENTERPRISES Aim) AuSTRALIAN COMPANIES, IT IS THEREFORE
APPROPIATE TO OUTLJ1NE THE BROAD PRINCIPLES 012CH GUIDE OUR
ATTITUDE TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT, YOU WOULD ALL BE AWARE THAT
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT NO LONGER HAS A WHOLLY UNCRITICAL
ATTITUIDC TO LNV'STMENT FROM OVERSEAS, WE HAVE ADOP-TED A MORE
SELECTIVEF APPROACH TO SUCH ) NVESTMENTrs, WE INTEND TO ENSURE
THAT FOREIGN CAPITAL INFLOWS ARF ASSOCIAIED WITH PRODUICTIVE
INVESTMENT WHICH ADDS TO / IU&amp; TRALIAN HEAL RESOURCES ANT) BRINGS'
US BENEFIT.-THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE NO WISH TO SEE
1* URTHE9YV RSEAS CAPITAL FLOW ) IqTO A\ USTRA. WIE THINK THAT
SUCH CAPITAL MU'. iT CONTINUE TO PLAY A SIGNIrICANT ROLE,
IN PARINERSHIP WITH hUSTRALIAN CAPITALI N OUR FUTURE ECONOMIC
GROWTH, FOREIGN INVES-TMENT, HOWEVER, MUST NOT CONFLICT WITH
OUR FIRM POLICY OF PROMOTING AUSTRALIAN CONTROL OF AU-S7RALIAN
RESOURNCES AND INDUJSTRIES, N WANT ' To ACHIE VE THE HIGHEST
POSS'IBLE LEV'EL or AUSTRALIAN OWNFRSHIP IN OUR RESOURCES ANT)
INDUSTRILS, BY' THIS WE MEAN WE WANT TO'ACHIEVEF THE HIGHEST
Au-STR
PROJFCTf BY PRO. JECT, THAT ARE. FAIR AND R: EASONABLE TO BOTH PARTIES
AND ARE WITHIN ' Il
WtW-r.. ~ Ot hAA~ 17 46.4d 
FOR TOO LONG AUS5ITALIA WAS SEDUCED BY THE QUICK DEAL
AND FAILED TO RESIST THE TEMPTATION FOR EASY PROFIT AT THE
EXPENSE OF OUR LONGER TERM NATIONAL INTERESTS. UNDER OUR
PREDECESSORS 68% OF OUR FNERGY RESOURCES FELL INTO THE HANDS OF
FOREIGN COMPANIES, THis SHOU[ LD NOT HAVE HAPPENED AND, SO F-AR
AS MY GOVERWILNT IS CONCERNED, WILL NOT HAPPEN AGAIN.
14E HAVE SOUGHT TO EXTEND AND STRENGTHEN OUR FOREIGN TAKEOV/ ERS
LEGISLA-TION, THE SENATE., HOWEVER, HASS ODSTRUCTED-1 MUCH OF OUR
I-NDEAVOUR IN THIS FIELD, NEVERTHELESS I ANNOUNCED IN M~ AY THAT
THE GOVERNMENT PROPOSED THREE BASIC EXTENSfONS TO THE FOREIGN
TAKEOVERS LEGISLA
THE MO-ST SERIOUS OMISSION ) N THE PRLSENT ACT' IS THAT
IT APPLIL-s ONLY * TO THE PURCHASE OF SHARES. IT DOES NOT PREVENT
AN OVERSEAS COMPANY BUYING ALL Or PART OF THE ASSETS OF AN
AUSTRA~ IAN COMPANY AS DISTINCT FROM THE SHAREHOLDINGS. THIS
IS A MAJOR LOOPHOLE. THE EFFECT OF BUYING SHARES OR BUYING
ASSETS IS THE SAME. THE SECOND DEFICIENCY IN THE LEGISLATION
IS THAT. iT DOES NOT INCLUDE COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR FOREIGN COMPANIES PROPOSING TO MAKE SUCH A TAKEOVER OF
ASSETS, WE WILL INCLUDE SUCH PROV'ISIONS, WF PROPOSE A THIRD
AMENDMENT. THE LEGISLATION DOES NOT EXTEND TO COMPANIES ALREADY
UN4DER FOREIGN CONTROL BUT IN % H) Cfl THERE IS A SIGN[ FICANT
11INOR IVl-AUISTRAIJAN I NTIRLsT. ' tHCPRE HAVE BEEiN A WUmBrER OF
OCCASIONS WHEN THE AuSTRALIAN EQUITY IN A VENTURE HAS BEEN
DIMINISHED BY A $ I( ARE ISGUE OR A SHARE SWAP, WE PROPOSE THAT,
ON CERTAIN C'. RiTF~ I\' A, ANY ATTIMI'T TO DIMINISH A SIGNIFICANT
(\ umTALI/' N N1TEREsTr. EVEN ) F IT IS A NON-CONTROLLING INTERESTi
SHOULD EE MADE EXAMINABLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURES
DJEVELOPED DY THE FOREiGNq TAKEOVERS COMMITTEE, 
CONTROL OF FOREIGN TAK( EOVERS IS ONE ASPECT OF POLICY
DESIGNED TO MAXIMISE AUSTRALIAN OWNFROHIP AND CONTROL, [ HE
GOVERNMENT IN ) TS ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS HAS ESTABL3SHED
. A BROADER SYSTEM OF SURVEJLLIANCE OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT PROPOSAL
NOT INVOLVING DIRECT ACQUISITION OF AIS" TRALIAN BUSIrNESSES,
IANNOUNCED IN MY POLICY SPEECH THAT WE WOULD rORMALISE THESE
ARRANGEMENTS. WE WOULD CSTABL3SH A BROAD gCNEENiNG PROCFSS
WH) CH WOULD COVER BOTH THE FOREIGN TAK~ EOVERS PROCEDURES, AS
* AMENDED, AND NEW DIRECT FOREIGN ) NVESTMENT ANY NEW FOREIGN
COMPANY PROPOSING TO SET UP iN AUS~ iTRALIA FOR THE FIRST TIMEP
OR ANY FOREIGN COMPANY PROPOSING TO EXTEND ITS INVESTMENT INTO
SNEW AREASt WOULD BE REQUIRED TO APPLY To THE TREASURY AND
THE DE'TA1LS OF THE PROPOSFD INVESTMENT WOULD BE REVIEWED,
THE ISCREENING PROCES( SW WILL-ENSURE THAT ANY PROPOSED
[: ORE IGN INVESTMENT WHICH ) S ALLOWED CONFORM$ WITH. AUSTRALIA'S
NATIONAL INTEREST, THE MATTERS WHICH WILL RECEIVE PARTICULAR
AT'IENTiON ARE EXPORT FRANCII{. SE"' l RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
EXPEND17TURE, LICCENSING OF TECHNOLOGY, PURCHM4,' NG POLICIES AND
TAX AVOIDANCE, OVER A PERIOD OF TIME GUIDELINES IN THESE AREAS
W1ILL BECOME MORE DEF1I4ITE AS OUR FXPERIENCE GROWS, FORLIGN
COMPANIES ALREADY OPLH\ A'rmNG iN AUSjTRALIA WILL BE EXPECTE-D TO
CONFORM WITH THESE GUIDELINES PROGRESSIVELY8 IN THIS WAY WE W! L'
EN4SURE THAT THE FOREIGN ) NVESTMENT THAT HAS ALREADY IBEE14
ALLOWED WILL CONFORM TO THE AuST-RALIAN NATIONAL INTEREST AS
WELL AS ANY NEW FOREIGN INVESTMENT THAT IS ALLOWED, 
IN KEEPING W1111 THE INTENTIONS I STATED IN flAYJ
THE GOV'ERNMENT IN JUNE ESTABLISHED A NEW 114TERDEPARIMENTAL R.'
COMMITTEE TO EXAMINE AND PROVIDE ADVICE ON FOREI%'' N INVESTMENT
PROPOSAL&amp; WHICH COME UNDER NCOTICE THROUGH THE EXCHANGE
CONTROL MiECHANISK AND DO NOT INVOLVE THE TAKEOVERS OF AUS TRALI
B U SINIs s cs THE NEW COMM1TL PARALLLLS AND COMPLEMENTS THE
EXISING COMMITTEE ON ' FORE'IGN TAKEOVERS, IT HAS ALSO BEEN
ASKED TO BRING FORWARDl, FOR-THE GOVERNMENT'tS COINSED ñ RATIONt
DJETAILED) PROPOSALS FOR THE SCREEN4ING OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT
ACTIVI1TIES WH) CH DO NOT INVOLVE EXCHANGE CONTA10L APPROVALSFOR
EXAMPLE, INVESTMENT PROP05ALS WH) CH'HOUl. I) BE FINANCED
BY FORLIGN INTERE. STS FROM FUNDS AVAILABLE TO THEM FROM
AUSTRALIAN SOURCES.
THE GOVERNMENT IS NOT LOOKENG AT FOREIGN INVESTMENT
IN A PURELY NFGATI\' E WAY; IT IS NOT SIMPLY IMPOSING RESTRICTIO
As 1 SAID IN A SPEECH IN PERTH ( IN THE SECOND OF MAY: " THE
0QUESTION IS NOT VIHFTHER'VE PERMIT OVERSEAS CAPITAL TO DO LESS4
THE QUESTION IS WHETHER VIE CAN ENSURE THAT AUSTRALIAN DOES
MORE" IT IS WITH llitS IN MIND T14AT WE HAVE SOUGHT TO EXTEND
7H[ ACTIVITIES OF. THE AUSTRAI1AN ltqDUSTRY DEV'ELOPMENT CORPORATI
IT is FOR THIS REASON T14AT WE HAVE PERSEVFRED WITH ESTABLISHIN
TrHE PETROLEUM ANT) MINERALS AUTHORITfY. IT IS THROUGH THESE
AGINC[ US THAT WE CAN MOBILISE AUSTRAlIA ' S HUMAN AND CAPITAL
RESOURCES TO ENABLE US TO DEVELOP OUR OWN RESOURCES AND
I NDUSTRiLS. SUCH GREAT ITALIAN FlNTERPRISES A\ S ENT&amp; AND THE
IS11TUTO PER LA RhCOISTRUZJ) NE INDUSTRIALE ( I1U) HAVE INDICATELD
HOW CORPORATIONS CAN PLAY A VITAL ROLE IN MODERATE SIZED COUNTT~
WITH LIMITED RESOURCE CAPITAL, 
V u
HAVING OUTLINED OUR INTENTIONS IN THIS FIELD,
IREPEAT THAT THE GOVERNMENT 5THll. SEES A PLACE FOR FOREIG6N
INVESTMENT IN AUSTRA~ I-A, WE ARE APPt-YING OUR POLIC'Y IN A
PRAGMATIC WAY AND WE ARE EXAMINIIJING ALL CASES ON THEIR
INDIVIDUAL MLR1TS. WE AIM TO MAKE OUR JUDGEMENTS ' FAKING INTO
ACCOUNT THE FULL CIRCUMSTANCES OF EACH NEW PROJFCT, INCLUDfNG
SUCH FACTORS AS THE SIZE AND LOCATION OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT,
' fH1 USE MADE OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY, MARKETING ARR~ ANGEMENTS,
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS, LABOUR RELATIONS AND) ABORIGINAL INTERESTS
THIS W1LL NOT DENY PRODUCTIVE INVESTMENT, IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
(\ U&amp; iTRALIANi CAPITAL, WHICIH1 ADDS TO OUR REAL RESOUR~ CES,
[ IHERE IS THEREFORE EVERY 0, P PORTUN ITY FOR FRUITFUL
ITALIAN 11NVESTMENT 1N AUSTRALIA. WHILE RECOGNISIN4G OUR NEED
TO PROTECT OUR NATIONAL INTCRESTSI ITALIAN ) NVESTORS CAN
BENEFIT FROM AUSTRALIA'S RESOURCES AND INDUSTRIAL OPPORTUNI. T! ES,
A\ USTRALIA IN TURN CAN BENEFIT FROI-ITALIAN TECHNOLOGY AND
CAP I AL. 



IfBAPJG0: 2,30 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON.' WHITLAM4 Mop#$
AT THE OPENING OF THE K. H. BOYKETT BUILDING OF THE CAULFIELD
ILNSTITUT-E OF TECL GY MELBOURNE, FRIDAY, 16 AUGUST 1974
FEW OCCASIONS ARE MORE CONGENIAL TO THE LEADER OF
A GOVERNMENT THAN THE OPENING OF A BUILDING WHOSE PURPOSES
REFLECT AND SYMBOLISE MANY OF THE GOVERNMENT'S CENTRAL
POLICIES AND AMBITIONS. SO IT IS WITH THIS BUILDING AND
THIS INSTITUTE. K. H. BOYKETT'S LONG AND DISTINGUISHED CAREER
AS AN EDUCATOR, AS A BUSINESSMAN, AS AN ADVOCATE, AS A MEMBER
OF THE COUNCIL OF THIS INSTITUTE FOR 16 YEARS, SAW CHANGES OF
GREAT AND LASTING SIGNIFICANCE IN THE-PATTERN OF EDUCATION IN
THIS STATE. HE WAS PRESIDENT OF YOUR COUNCIL WHEN THE
CAULFIELD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY BECAME AN AUTONOMOUS BODY
AND HE DIED WHILE STILL A SERVING MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL$
HE PARTICIPATED IN A PROCESS OF EVOLUTION AND REFORM WHICH
CULMINATED IN THE ASSUMPTION LAST YEAR BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY
EDUCATION. THIS IS THE FIRST SIGNIFICANT EXTENSION TO A
TERTIARY INSTITUTION TO BE COMPLETED SINCE THAT CHANGE WAS MADE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, I AM PROUD TO SAY, HAS CONTRIBUTED
MORE THAN $ 2 MILLION FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THIS BUILDING IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA. I AM DELIGHTED
THAT IT SHOULD BEAR THE NAME OF SO DISTINGUISHED A SERVANT OF
EDUCATION IN THIS STATES 
IL
IT IS EASY FOR THE COMMUNITY TO FORGET THE ESSENTIAL
PART PLAYED BY COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND INSTITUTES
SUCH AS YOURS IN THE TOTAL EDUCATIONAL PROCESS. YOUR INSTITUTE,
NOW MORE THAN HALF A CENTURY OLD, HAS A PARTICULARLY LONG
AND IMPRESSIVE HISTORY. INDEED, THE LEADING COLLEGES AND
INSTITUTES IN THIS COUNTRY HAVE A LONGER HISTORY THAN ALL BUT
SIX OF THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES. YOU HAVE A KEY ROLE IN
TRAINING YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN IN TECHNICAL SKILLS AND DISCIPLINES,
IN THE APPLIED SCIENCES AND INDEED IN THE HUMANITIES, IN A
MANNER ESSENTIAL TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN ADVANCED AND
PROSPEROUS SOCIETY SUCH AS OURS.
IN ITS APPROACH TO EDUCATION, THE GOVERNMENT'S PURPOSE
HAS BEEN TO STRESS THE CONTINUITY AND INTERDEPENDENCE OF ALL ITS
ASPECTS. MANY PEOPLE HAVE THE IMPRESSION THAT THE GOVERNMENT'S
GREAT AND LASTING REFORMS IN EDUCATION HAVE BEEN CONFINED TO
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ALONE. THAT IS NOT SO. IT IS
TRUE THAT OUR FIRST PRIORITY WAS IN THESE AREAS BECAUSE THESE
WERE THE AREAS OF GREATEST NEED, OUR PLANS, HOWEVER, ARE
DIRECTED ACROSS THE WHOLE SPECTRUM OF EDUCATION. WE REGARD
ALL LEVELS AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION AS RELATED PARTS OF A CONTINI
AND ALL-EMBRACING PROCESS OF INSTRUCTION AND ENGLIGHTENMENT. 
-3-
THE GREAT FAILURE OF OUR PREDECESSORS IF I MAY
SAY SO WAS TO TREAT EDUCATION ON A PIECEMEAL BASIS, PATCHING
UP DEFICIENCIES HERE AND THERE. WE LOST SIGHT OF THE NEEDS
AND PURPOSES OF EDUCATION AS A WHOLE. WE PRODUCED MORE
INEQUALITIES AND ANOMALIES THAN WE REMOVED. ONLY NOW ARE WE
BEGINNING TO SEE THE NEEDS OF EDUCATION AS A WHOLE, AND TO
RECOGNISE THAT THE ROLE AND FUNCTION OF INSTITUTES SUCH AS
THIS ARE EVERY BIT AS IMPORTANT TO THE TOTAL CONCEPT AS SECONDARY
SCHOOLS OR UNIVERSITIES.
THIS HAS MEANT A CONSIDERABLE CHANGE IN MANY OF OUR
ATTITUDES, AND NOT TO PUT TOO FINE A POINT ON IT, IN MANY OF
OUR PREJUDICES. IT HAS ENABLED US, FOR EXAMPLE, TO FREE THE
WHOLE DEBATE ON PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION FROM ITS FORMER
SECTARIAN PREOCCUPATIONS. I BELIEVE THE COMMUNITY NOW ACCEPTS
AS AN UNALTERABLE PROPOSITION THAT THE QUALITY AND EXTENT OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY TO OUR CHILDREN'S EDUCATION
HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH THEIR RELIGION. IT HAS ENABLED US TO
APPROACH THE WHOLE QUESTION OF PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION ON THE
BASIS THAT PRE-SCHOOLING IS A RIGHT OF EVERY CHILD AND AN
ESSENTIAL PART OF THE TOTAL EDUCATIONAL PROCESS. IT HAS ENABLED
US TO INAUGURATE A NEW DEAL FOR TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION,
FREEING THIS AREA FROM ARTIFICIAL NOTIONS OF SNOBBERY AND
CLASS DISTINCTION. IT HAS ENABLED US TO TREAT INSTITUTES OF
TECHNOLOGY AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION IN A NEW AND MORE
ENLIGHTENED WAY RECOGNISING THEIR UNIQUE AND INDISPENSABLE
PLACE IN THE EDUCATIONAL CONTINUUM, AND DISPELLING FOREVER
THE IGNORANT AND DESTRUCTIVE IMPRESSION THAT THEY WERE POOR
RELATIONS OF UNIVERSITIES. 
I BELIEVE THE ESSENTIAL QUALITY OF A DYNAMIC AND
DEMOCRATIC EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IS DIVERSITY BUT A DIVERSITY
OF EQUAL AND RELATED PARTS. EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT
TO PARTICIPATE TO THE FULL IN THE TYPE OF EDUCATION THAT SUITS
HIM BEST, EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EDUCATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT
EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE THE SAME EDUCATION OR, JUST AS IMPORTANT,
THAT EVERYONE SHOULD WANI THE SAME EDUCATION. ONE OF OUR
MISTAKES HAS BEEN TO PLACE TOO HIGH A SOCIAL PREMIUM ON CERTAIN
KINDS OF EDUCATION AT THE EXPENSE OF THE COMMUNITY'S NEEDS.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY MEANS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE,
OF DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS
SHOULD APPLY IN WHATEVER INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES.
OF COURSE PEOPLE SHOULD BE FREE TO CHOOSE THE KIND OF
EDUCATION THEY WANT, BUT THIS CHOICE MUST BE ONE BETWEEN
SYSTEMS AND COURSES; NOT BETWEEN STANDARDS, NOT BETWEEN A
GOOD EDUCATION AND A BAD ONE, AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR A
POOR ONE, A SOCIALLY ESTEEMED EDUCATION OR ONE THAT IS SOCIALLY
DOWNGRADED. THE PURPOSE OF MY GOVERNMENT'S REFORMS HAS BEEN
TO ENTRENCH THIS GENUINE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, NOT
IN A NARROW FINANCIAL SENSE, BUT AS A BROAD PHILOSOPHICAL
PRINCIPLE BINDING ON US AND ON ALL FUTURE GOVERNMENTS. 
YOUR INSTITUTE REFLECTS THE GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN
THAT EDUCATION SHOULD SERVE, OR AT LEAST RECOGNISE, THE
OVERALL NEEDS OF SOCIETY FOR TRAINING AND SKILLS. NOT ONLY
DO WE REGARD THE DIFFERENT LEVELS AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION
AS. PART OF A SINGLE PROCESSS: MORE THAN ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT*
WE ARE ANXIOUS THAT EDUCATION ITSELF SHOULD BE INTEGRAL TO A
TOTAL CONCEPT OF SOCIAL GOALS AND PRIORITIES, As YOUR FIRST
ANNUAL REPORT STATED:
" CI. T. IS DESIGNING ITS FUTURE TO MEET THE DEMANDS
OF A FAST CHANGING TECHNOLOGY, PROVIDING STUDENTS
WITH THE PERSONAL REQUIREMENTS AND THE NECESSARY
SKILLS TO MEET THE NEEDS OF EMPLOYERS, AND KEEPING
CLOSE CONTACT WITH INDUSTRY THROUGH FULL-TIME, PARTTIME
AND SHORT COURSES,"
THAT IS ONLY ONE OF YOUR FUNCTIONS, BUT IT EXEMPLIFIES THE
SENSE OF SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY WHICH MUST GOVERN THE CHOICE
OF COURSES AND PROGRAMS IN INSTITUTES OF THIS. KIND,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TODAY IS MORE DEEPLY INVOLVED
IN TERTIARY EDUCATION THAN ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, FROM THE
BEGINNING OF THIS YEAR WE HAVE ASSUMED TOTAL FUNDING
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, TUITION AND RELATED
FEES IN COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS
OF TERTIARY AND POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION HAVE BEEN ABOLISHED, 
-6-
APART FROM FUNDING, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CO-ORDINATION AND BALANCED DEVELOPMENT
OF ADVANCED EDUCATION FACILITIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA,
To THIS END IT LOOKS FOR ADVICE TO THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED
EDUCATION, THE COMMISSION IS NOW CONSIDERING SUBMISSIONS
FROM ALL COLLEGES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND FUNDING DURING THE
1976-78 TRIENNIUM, AS A RESULT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S ACCEPTANCE
OF THE COMMISSION'S REPORT ON TEACHER EDUCATION, FORMER STATE
TEACHERSI COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERSI COLLEGES ARE NOW
ALSO BEING FUNDED UNDER ADVANCED EDUCATION ARRANGEMENTS,
THE GOVERNMENT'S TOTAL FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTION TO ADVANCED
EDUCATION IN THE 1973-75 TRIENNIUM IS MORE THAN $ 600 MILLION,
THIS IS A LARGE SUM BUT IT IS ONLY PART OF OUR
COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION AS A WHOLE. SOME INDICATION OF THE
SCALE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO EDUCATION
GENERALLY CAN BE OBTAINED FROM THE COMPARATIVE ANNUAL FIGURES
FOR EXPENDITURE. IN 1972-73 THE TOTAL* AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
OUTLAY ON EDUCATION AT ALL LEVELS WAS $ 439 MILLION. IN 1973-74
( THE FIRST FULL FINANCIAL YEAR OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT) WE
SPENT NEARLY TWICE THAT AMOUNT OVER $ 800 MILLION DESPITE
THE FACT THAT OUR MAJOR NEW PROGRAMS OF FINANCE FOR EDUCATION
WERE NOT OPERATING FOR MORE THAN THE FINAL SIX MONTHS OF THAT
YEAR, NOT UNTIL NEXT YEAR 1974-75 WILL WE SEE ANYTHING
LIKE THE FULL IMPACT OF THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS, ( EVEN SO
IT WILL NOT REFLECT THE FULL IMPACT OF NEW PROGRAMS IN THE
PRE-SCHOOLS AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION AREAS), WHILE THE PRECISE
FIGURE OF EXPENDITURE FOR 1974/ 75 IS NOT AS YET KNOWN, IT IS
CLEAR THAT IT WILL BE MORE THAN THREE TIMES THE TOTAL LEVEL OF
EXPENDITURE IN 1972-73, 
THE MAJOR ELEMENTS IN THESE MASSIVE INCREASES IN
OUR COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION HAVE OF COURSE BEEN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KARMEL REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
SCHOOLS AND OUR ASSUMPTION OF FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCING
TERTIARY EDUCATION. THE EXPENDITURE FIGURES, HOWEVER IMPRESSIVE
AS THEY ARE DO NOT SHOW THE FULL PICTURE. WE ARE CONCERNED
NOT JUST WITH QUANTITY BUT WITH QUALITY. So OUR NEW PROGRAMS
HAVE REFLECTED CONCERN FOR THE NEEDS OF THE INDIVIDUAL
PARTICULARLY THE HANDICAPPED AND OTHER DISADVANTAGED STUDENTS,
AND WITH-THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF INNOVATION.
THIS EMPHASIS ON INNOVATION WILL BE PARTICULARLY MARKED
IN THE AREA OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THE REPORT OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION
THE KANGAN REPORT WAS TABLED BY THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION IN
APRIL. IT RECOMMENDED CAPITAL AND RECURRENT GRANTS TO THIS AREA
OF MORE THAN $ 104 MILLION, THE GOVERNMENT PROMPTLY ACCEPTED THE
VALIDITY OF ITS BROAD PROPOSALS, AND BUT FOR THE DOUBLE
DISSOLUTION, THESE PROGRAMS WOULD NOW BE WELL UNDER WAY, 
-8-
I HAVE STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
PLACES ON LINKING TOGETHER OUR VARIOUS INITIATIVES IN A
CO-ORDINATED AND INTEGRATED FASHION. WHAT THE KANGAN REPORT
SAYS ABOUT THE CONCEPT OF RECURRENT EDUCATION AND OPENING UP
THE ACCESS GENERALLY OF ADULTS TO EDUCATION IS REFLECTED
ALSO IN THE PROPOSALS RECENTLY PUT FORWARD INTHE DRAFT
REPORT ON OPEN TERTIARY EDUCATION, WHICH HAS BEEN PRODUCED
BY A COMMITTEE OF THE UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION.
SIMILARLY, THERE IS A CLOSE LINK BETWEEN THE KANGAN'REPORT
ON TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION AND THE COCHRANE REPORT
ON LABOR MARKET TRAINING WHICH WE RECEIVED LAST MONTH, THE
COCHRANE REPORT OUTLINES PROPOSALS FOR A NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT
AND TRAINING SCHEME WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED IN
PRINCIPLE TO ADOPT, IT CAN BE EXPECTED TO HAVE AN IMPACT
UPON THE FACILITIES REQUIRED IN TECHNICAL COLLEGES THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY, AND THE KANGAN REPORT IS OF OBVIOUS IMPORTANCE
IN RECOMMENDING ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THOSE COLLEGES,
THE TWO GO TOGETHER, ONCE AGAIN WE SEE THE IMPORTANCE OF A
CO-ORDINATED AND PLANNED APPROACH TO EDUCATION AS A WHOLE, 
-9-
WE SEE. OUR NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SCHEME
AS A MAJOR COMPONENT OF A MANPOWER POLICY AIMED AT IMPROVING
THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES OF ALL
MEMBERS OF THE WORKFORCE. IT WILL BE NO MERE SHORT-TERM
PALEIATIVE FOR UNEMPLOYMENT. IT WILL BE COMPREHENSIVE AND
FLEXIBLE; IT WILL COVER A WIDE RANGE OF SKILLS; IT WILL
RESPOND TO CHANGES IN TECHNOLOGY AND THE NEEDS OF MODERN
INDUSTRY. CLEARLY ITS SUCCESS WILL DEPEND ON CO-OPERATION
WITH IMPORTANT COLLEGES AND INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY SUCH AS
YOURS, LET ME QUOTE SOME REMARKS MY COLLEAGUE MR. BEAZLEY
MADE LAST YEAR TO THE FIRST MEETING OF THE KANGAN COMMITTEE,
THEY INDICATE OUR BROAD APPROACH TO EDUCATION AND ARE RELEVANT
TO THE WIDER PURPOSES OF THIS INSTITUTE MR. BEAZLEY SAID:
" WE ARE NOW IMPLEMENTING A POLICY INVOLVING EXPERT
COMMISSIONS CHARGED WITH THE TASK OF EXAMINING THE
NEEDS OF ALL AUSTRALIAN STUDENTS, THE PRE-SCHOOLS
COMMITTEE IS INVESTIGATING THE DEMAND FOR KINDERGARTENS,
THEIR PLACEMENT AND REQUIREMENTS, WITH THE AIM OF
PROVIDING FACILITIES OF CANBERRA STANDARD TO ALL
AUSTRALIAN PRE-SCHOOLS WITHIN SIX YEARS; THE INTERIM
SCHOOLS COMMITTEE IS WORKING TO DESTROY THE INEQUALITIES
WHICH HAVE PLAGUED AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION FOR TOO LONG
BY ENSURING THAT FEDERAL MONEY GOES FIRST TO THE AREAS
WHERE IT IS NEEDED MOST,,, 
" I HOPE THAT YOU WILL DEVELOP FOR AUSTRALIA NOT MERELY
A STRATEGY OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, REACTING
TO THE STATES' NEEDS, YOUR GREATEST SERVICE MAY WELL
BE PREVENTING WASTE OF SKILL, WASTE OF MANPOWER, WASTE
OF EFFORT AND FRUSTRATION, BY DEVELOPING A PHILOSOPHY
OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION, THIS WILL EMBRACE'
PROPER RESPECT FOR CRAFTSMANSHIP, A HAPPY USE OF LEISURE,
AND EFFECTIVE LIVING FOR MANY PEOPLE,"
IT GIVES ME THE GREATEST SATISFACTION THAT VICTORIA'S
INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGYI LONG REGARDED AS THE POOR RELATIONS
OF THE TERTIARY SECTOR, ARE NOW EMBARKED ON A COURSE OF-STEADY
GROWTH AND EHANCED PRESTIGE, I BELIEVE YOUR PROPER AND
RIGHTFUL PLACE IN THE HIERARCHY OF THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM HAS
AT LAST BEEN RECOGNISED BY ALL BY GOVERNMENTS AND BY THE
COMMUNITY. A BRIGHT FUTURE LIES BEFORE YOU. 
-11-
THIS IS A TIME, AS YOU KNOW, WHEN HEAVY AND
COMPETING CLAIMS ARE MADE ON THE GOVERNMENT'S RESOURCES,
FOR MANY OF US FOR ALL OF US IT IS A TIME OF NECESSARY
FINANCIAL STRINGENCY, I GIVE YOUMY ASSURANCE, HOWEVER,
THAT THE PRIORITY WE ACCORD TO EDUCATION WILL REMAIN AS
HIGH AS BEFORE, FROM THE BEGINNING WE HAVE RECOGNISED
EDUCATION AS A PARAMOUNT RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT AND WE WILL CONTINUE TO DO SO, THERE WILL BE
NO RETREAT FROM THAT GOAL, THERE WILL BE NO SLACKENING
IN OUR EFFORTS TO REBUILD OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM AND GIVE
THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY TO EVERY
AUSTRALIAN CHILD AND TO EVERY AUSTRALIAN STUDENT WHATEVER
HIS MEANS, WHEREVER HE LIVES OR WHATEVER HIS GOAL IN LIFE, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR, E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE HENTY ELECTORATE OFFICE OF MRS, JOAN
CHILD, OAKLEIGH, MELBOURNE, VIC.
FRIDAY, 16 AUGUST 1974
1. THE PEOPLE OF HENTY MADE HISTORY THIS YEAR BY ELECTING
MRS, JOAN CHILD AS THE FIRST WOMEN TO REPRESENT THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME HENTY HAD ELECTED A WOMEN TO THE
PARLIAMENT. THE 1968 RE-DISTRIBUTION CHANGED THE ELECTORATE
IN A WAY WHICH STRENGTHENED THE LIBERAL PARTY'S PROSPECTS
OF HOLDING THE SEAT, BUT AT HER SECOND ATTEMPT, MRS. CHILD
WON IT. IT IS SOMETHING OF A LABOR OASIS IN A LIBERAL DESERT.
AS IT IS SURROUNDED BY FIVE LIBERAL SEATS HOTHAM, BRUCE,
CHISiHOLM, BALACLAVA AND HIGGINS.
2. MRS, CHILD DELIVERED HER MAIDEN SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON 16 JULY, SHE DEVOTED MOST OF HER SPEECH
TO ARGUING THE NEED FOR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO DO MORE
FOR HANDICAPPED PEOPLE. THIS IS AN AREA IN WHICH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MUCH. IN THE LAST 20 MONTHS.
WE ARE DETERMINED TO ENSURE ADEQUATE HELP FOR THE HANDICAPPED,
BOTH YOUNG AND OLD. IN LAST '' EAR'S BUDGET THE HANDICAPPED
CHILDRENS BENEFIT WAS DOUBLED FROM $ 1.50 A DAY TO $ 3,00 A DAY,
THIS BENEFIT, WHICH IS PAID UNDER THE NATIONAL HEALTH ACT,
WAS INTRODUCED IN 1969. IT HAS TWO PURPOSES: 
-2-
TO ASSIST PARENTS OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN AND TO HELP
ORGANISATIONS MEET THE RUNNING COSTS OF HOMES. THE BUDGET
CONTAINED FOUR SPECIFIC BENEFITS FOR THE REHABILITATION OF
HANDICAPPED PEOPLE. IT REMOVED THE THREE-YEAR LIMIT FOR
ASSISTANCE THROUGH THE WELFARE REHABILITATION SERVICE.
PREVIOUSLY PEOPLE WERE ACCEPTED FOR REHABILITATION ONLY
IF THEY WERE CONSIDERED TO HAVE REASONABLE PROSPECTS OF BEING
ENGAGED IN A SUITABLE VOCATION WITHIN THREE YEARS. THE
TRAINING ALLOWANCE FOR PEOPLE UNDERGOING FULL-TIME VOCATIONAL
TRAINING THROUGH THE WELFARE REHABILITATION SERVICE WAS
INCREASED FROM $ 4,00 A WEEK TO $ 8.00 A WEEK, THE LIVINGAWAY-
FROM-HOME ALLOWANCE WAS DOUBLED AND SET AT $ 10.00 A WEEK
FOR UNMARRIED TRAINEES UNDERGOING FULL-TIME TRAINING THROUGH
THE REHABILITATION TRAINING SCHEME AND AT $ 16.00 A WEEK FOR
MARRIED TRAINEES. THESE ALLOWANCES ARE DESIGNED TO ASSIST
HANDICAPPED PEOPLE WHO MUST LIVE AWAY FROM THEIR USUAL PLACE
OF RESIDENCE IN ORDER TO UNDERGO VOCATIONAL TRAINING. IN
ADDITION THE BUDGET PROVIDED A $ 2 FOR $ 1 GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY
ON MONEY BORROWED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES FOR PROJECTS
UNDER THE SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT ( ASSISTANCE) ACT AND THE
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN ( ASSISTANCE) ACT. THIS MEASURE IS
AIMED AT ENCOURAGING LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO SPONSOR
SHELTERED WORKSHOPS, TRAINING CENTRES AND HOSTELS FOR HANDICAPPED.
ADULTS AND CHILDREN. PREVIOUSLY, LEGISLATION HAD PREVENTED
THESE FUNDS FROM ATTRACTING A SUBSIDY. 
7. M, 151 ApsWA AD A 1 uRA
70 A330029~ UAMMOA39 BJVAH OT G3015 DA9 09:
L3T1AMY 39P5HT MI HTTW H1OITA) O\' ,&amp; ATM " 0H1 ' Dtj
74TA) 07 MIT-JJUR ONI W. 3. J U9I039 20o1 RKvv.
2AW ST/ E V0I TAT1ISAH39I 3WAW 3MT VVIOS @ iW
AWIvv MnT J) 33W~~ A 00~. 8~ 1O T 3iW A 00.9 MW ~ MA W
AI33W A GOO4C' TA 133 W~ A GaJusuc aA M~ vAMA; K
H~' O9HT TUIMIAS1 3MIT-IU9 WA/ iMCUtU 233W! Ak* cAq
P0 A33WA 03af TA Wll BHN M'APIAT IAOPAT&gt; lWAv
T23I8A OT1 MAIN~ MIA 230H'AWOJJA 3UHT sumn
3309J jARJJ MAI~ T M02V1 YAWA 3VJJ N3UM OH1W 30039~ Glq';,
Al &amp; WWlvIAST JAVWQJTA00V 00HOWii~ C) T P7VCHt 01 PVW] Qj :. V
T/ it, VI. v . A v; vA j't/ tmAW n3m
A3Y RA 7A( WAYWA . IT j 
-3-
3. DRAMATIC ADVANCES HAVE ALSO BEEN MADE BY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS CONCERNED WITH HANDICAPPED PEOPLE,
SUCH AS THE DEPARTMENTS OF EDUCATION AND HEALTH, FOLLOWING
THE REPORT OF THE INTERIM COMMITTEE FOR THE AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS
COMMISSION, THE GOVERNMENT IS MOUNTING A MAJOR ATTACK ON THE
PRESENT DEFICIENCIES IN THE EDUCATION OF MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY
HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, IN 1974 AND 1975 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL PROVIDE THE STATES WITH A GRANT OF $ 435 MILLION FOR SPECIAL
AND REMEDIAL EDUCATION. THIS WILL ENABLE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
A PROGRAM CONSISTING OF CONSTRUCTION OF NEW SCHOOLS AND THE
REPLACEMENT AND UPGRADING OF EXISTING SUB-STANDARD ONES, THE
PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL MATERIALS, AN INCREASE IN SUPPORT AND
SPECIALIST STAFF AND A REDUCTION IN CLASS SIZES, IN THE SAME
PERIOD WE WILL PROVIDE A TOTAL OF $ 3,63 MILLION FOR THE TRAINING
OF TEACHERS OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, THEFUNDS WE ARE PROVIDING
WILL REPRESENT THE FIRST SUBSTANTIAL RECOGNITION BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OF THE NEED OF STATE EDUCATION AUTHORITIES
FOR SPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE EDUCATION OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN,
PROVISION HAS ALSO BEEN MADE FOR HANDICAPPED PEOPLE IN OUR
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM, WHICH HAS BEEN INITIATED BY THE
AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR HEALTH, DR. EVERINGHAM, AND THE NEWLY
ESTABLISHED HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSION, 
4, THE GOVERNMENT'S OVERALL AIM IS TO REPLACE THE PREVIOUS
AD HOC APPROACH TO WELFARE WITH A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH WHICH
TAKES INTO ACCOUNT THE NEEDS OF PHYSICALLY, MENTALLY AND
FINANCIALLY DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE ACROSS THE NATION, WE WANT
TO SEE THE NATION'S WELFARE RESOURCES CO-ORDINATED FOR THE
FIRST TIME, THE MAJOR EFFORT DIRECTED TO THIS END IS IN THE
HANDS OF THE SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION, IT WAS ESTABLISHED
BY THE GOVERNMENT LAST YEAR TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON COMMUNITY
NEEDS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF WELFARE PROGRAMS, TO DETERMINE
PRIORITIES AND EVALUATE PROGRAMS, TO ESTIMATE COSTS AND TO
ENCOURAGE THE CO-ORDINATTON AND INTEGRATION OF ALL WELFARE
SERVICES, THE COMMISSION HAS THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR INITIATING
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AS THE VEHICLE FOR CO-ORDINATING
AND INTEGRATING ALL WELFARE RESOURCES IN'A WAY THAT WILL BEST
MEET THE NEEDS OF AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITIES, THE ASSISTANCE PLAN
HAS AS ITS MAIN PURPOSE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTONOMOUS COMMUNITYBASED
SOCIAL PLANNING UNITS, THEIR JOB IS TO INCREASE LOCAL
INVOLVEMENT IN SOCIAL WELFARE ACTIVITY, ALTHOUGH THE PLAN HAS
BEEN IN OPERATION FOR ONLY A FEW MONTHS, THE FIRST OF THESE
PLANNING UNITS KNOWN AS REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
ARE TAKING SHAPE,
I 
IN HER MAIDEN SPEECH JOAN CHILD SAID:
" A NATION'S WEALTH IS MEASURED BY THE CARE AND COMPASSION
IT IS PREPARED TO EXTEND TO THE OLD AND LONELY, THE DEPENDENT,
THE DISABLED AND THE YOUNG WHO ARE IN THE SCHOOLS."
THAT VERY PRINCIPLE HAS GUIDED MUCH OF OUR ENDEAVOURS IN THE
LAST 20 MONTHS. I HAVE ALREADY OUTLINED WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR
THE DISABLED AND FOR OTHERS IN NEED OF WELFARE SERVICES.
IN THE CASE OF THE OLD, WE HAVE RECENTLY ANNOUNCED THE BIGGEST
PENSION INCREASE EVER GIVEN TO PENSIONERS. WE HAVE
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE FOR A WIDE RANGE
OF SERVICES FOR THE AGFn. ' ICH AS AGFn PERSONS HOUSING A
DOMICILIARY CARE AND SENIOR CITIZENS CENTRES. FOR THE YOUNG
WE HAVE. INTRODUCED A NEW CHARTER FOR THEIR EDUCATION. WE HAVE
ALMOST DOUBLED COMMONWEALTH EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION; WE HAVE
ESTABLISHED A PERMANENT SCHOOLS COMMISSION TO GIVE AID TO ALL
SCHOOLS, WITHOUT DISTINCTION, ON A ' NEEDS' BASIS; WE HAVE
ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOk IERTIARY EDUCATION,
AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES; FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE GIVING
ASSISTANCE TO TEACHERS' COLLEGES AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS'
COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS UNIVERSITIES AND COLLFGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION; WE ARE GIVING MUCH MOF GiF'ROUS AI. OWANCES
TO STUDENTS AND HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUM1BER OF TEA-HINC,
SCHOLARSHIPS. 
-6-
6. THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES THAT MORE NEEDS TO BE DONE TO
HELP THE DISADVANTAGED, THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, IN HIS SPEECH
AT THE OPENING OF THE PARLIAMENT ON 9 JULY, SAID THE
GOVERNMENT WOULD PROVIDE " FOR INCREASED ASSISTANCE FOR THE
HANDICAPPED AND DISABLED, FURTHER ASSISTANCE FOR ORGANISATIONS
CONDUCTING AGED PERSONS' HOMES AND NURSING HOMES AND HELP FOR
THE HOMELESS,"
O 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE N. S. W. AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY COUNCIL, SYDNEY, SUNDAY
AUGUST 1974
Just three months ago the people of Australia returned a
Labor Government for a further three years. We achieved success
very largely because the people of New South Wales refused to be
moved by the fear tactics of our opponents and the smear tactics
of Sir Robert Askin. They gave us a resounding vote in the
Senate and carried all four of our referendums. And a month agoin
Coogee and in Goulburn they took the opportunity to reply
direct to Sir Robert Askin and his administration. With the win
in Coogee we have taken another step towards a Labor Government in
New South Wales, a Labor Government under Neville Wran.
I take this first opportunity to congratulate the New South
Wales Branch, to congratulate Neville Wran, to congratulate and to
thank all of you, my colleagues in the national Parliament, the
officers and above all the rank and file members for your work,
your support and your achievements over the past three years and
particularly the past three months.
Now, three months after our work together led to'the
reaffirmation by the people of New South Wales and the people of
Australia of Labor's right to govern, it is fitting that here,
at the State Council of the Party, I should repeat what I said
to the nation shortly after those elections. I said:
" There should be no uncertainty in any
quarter about our ability and determination
to carry out our program and to provide
strong effective government for the full
term for which you have once again elected us."
Now just three months after the people delivered their
verdict, delivered it in our favour for a second time in 18 months,
our adversaries inside Parliament and beyond it seek every means
to set that verdict aside. To them it is nothing that the people
have twice returned a verdict in our favour. To them it is nothing
that the people have declared themselves, as firmly as our electoral
system allows, on issue after issue issues of tremendous importance
like the people's health, like Australian ownership of Australian
resources, like restrictive trade practices, like electoral reform.
To them it is nothing that their own nominal leaders have committed
themselves to support our proposals as Mr. Snedden and Mr. Anthony
emphatically did in the case of our amended legislation for the
Australian Industry Development Corporation, and as Mr. Snedden
did on the proposal to establish an Australian Superior Court more
than seven years ago when he himself was Attorney-General. They
rejected our universal Health Scheme put to the people at the
elections of 1969, 1972 and 1974. Now that the joint sitting has
passed the Health Bills, they propose to reject the co]. latere. J
legislation needed to give effect to the scheme. / 2 
7
-2-
The extraordinary thing, the intolerable thing, is that the
opposition Senators have become more obstructive, not less, more
bloody-minded, more irrational since the elections which they
themselves precipitated. In the session just completed they have
held up by outright rejection or postponement or by dragging out
debate, more than half of our Bills 30 out of 56.
This happens in a Senate in which our own strength was
increased from 26 to 29, a Senate happily devoid of DLP
representation. And more often than not, our legislation has been
rejected not by a majority but simply by rounding up just half the
Senate to negative a proposal. If the vote is 30-all, then the
proposal is lost.
So we have this situation: a mere 30 Senators can set aside
the clear decision of the majority of the House of Representativesthe
people's House, the House which determines who shall govern;
they can set those proposals aside even when they plainly express
decisions made not just by the elected government but by the,
people themselves, at two successive elections. This is a travesty
of the Parliamentary system and it is a travesty of democracy.
It is a travesty and it is a tragedy for Parliamentary democracy,
because this system is everywhere under challenge, in Europe,
in North America, even in Britain itself, the home of parliamentary
democracy. And the system is not so strong that it can sustain onslaught
after onslaught, unremitting war on its basic foundations.. That is
what is being done in the Australian Senate. This is not just a
matter of declaring war on the Labor Government. It is a declaration
of war on the system itself.
Mr. Snedden defends he certainly does not command the
conduct of his followers in the Senate by pleading that it is all
perfectly legal and constitutional. In recent history, the
irresponsibility of minorities and chance combinations of
Parliamentarians in France, in Italy, in Greece have repeatedly
undermined parliamentary democracy. That, too, was all perfectly
legal and constitutional but absolutely destructive of the
system. The question is not just one of the effect this obstruction,
this falsification of democracy, has on the ability of duly elected
governments to govern effectively and to carry through its program
and to plan effectively. Even more important is the question of
the people's faith in the system.
If democracy is to survive, if the parliamentary system is to
survive, the people must be able to believe that the system can
procide change through peaceful methods. The strength of parliamentary
democracy is that it combines the opportunity for social change
with political stability. Our opponents are striving for the
minimum of change with the maximum of political instability.
In their efforts to thwart our program for change the program
twice endorsed by the electors, they are attempting to strip
democracy of its true meaning, to deprive it of its real strength.
It is a thoroughly mischievous and highly dangerous exercise. 
-3
And never more mischievous, never more dangerous than in
the times through which we are now passing, at a time when
governments around the world are confronting the enormous challenge
of inflation. The really damaging thing about inflation is that if
long continued it eats away at the very fabric of society. It
undermines the things which unite us and magnifies the things
which divide us. To add to this problem a new dimension of political
divisiveness is to put a double pressure on a system already under
tremendous stress. The supreme irony is that this sabotage comes
from a party claiming to be the champion of tradition and the
guardian of the constitution.
Throughout the last 14 years as Leader and Deputy Leader of
our Party I have asserted the primacy of Parliament, particularly
the national Parliament, as the instrument for the fulfillment of
our policies. A little more than seven years ago at the annual
conference of this Branch I said to you:
" The test of a political party such as ours is
its ability to win power through Parliament,
to secure throughout Australia a majority of
votes of our fellow citizens. The people who
vote for us and a vast majority of those who
don't increasingly look to the initiative
which the national Parliament could take and
to plans the national Government could make for
a solution of their problems and the
consummation of their aspirations."
I asserted, and the Party accepted, that if we were to secure
a majority of the votes of our fellow citizens, we ourselves as a
party had to be broadly representative of at least half the people.
This belief was behind the reorganisation and reconstruction of
the party at the national level and in New South Wales and Victoria.
The people responded to our efforts. We did make ourselves more
representative and more responsive and more responsible. The result
has been that twice within 18 months a majority of the people of
Australia have given us a majority in the House of Representatives.
Twice they have chosen our men and our measures. Twice they have
expressed clear support for our policies and for a Labor Government.
How many elections must be fought and won before our opponents
accept the people's verdict, before they abandon their belief in their
divine right to rule? We allow ourselves no such delusion. We
believe our right to govern rests upon the consent of the governed,
a consent and a confirmation twice given. We shall exercise that
right. We shall exercise the right to govern given us by a majority
in the House of Representatives, the people's House, a consent
confirmed a mere three months ago, a consent for us to continue to
implement our program for the next three years. We shall continue.
I shall continue continue to fight to implement our Labor program,
continue to fight against inflation, continue to fight to preserve
parliamentary democracy in this country. / 4 
-4
We are faced with an irresponsible, a discredited Opposition,
a discarded opposition, the most irresponsible and irrational
Opposition in the history of Federation. in these circumstances
we have a double responsibility all of us who form the
Government, all of us in the whole Labor movement who have worked
so hard, so long to create our Government and to give our fellow
citizens the opportunities which our programs offer. When, as has
happened, an opposition defects from the system and sets out
deliberately to sabotage the system, it becomes double important
for us to stand firm and to stand together in defence of our program.
When an opposition deliberately sets out to create a climate of
hysteria, it becomes doubly important that we should not lose
our nerve. When an opposition deliberately sets out to sow the seeds of
panic and division in the community it becomes doubly important that
we should stand strong and united. Thi's is a responsibility that
no section of the movement can avoid. We are in this together.
It is not just the Whitlam Government; it is a Labor government
and it is the people's elected Government.
And it has to be said that there are some sections of the
movement whose co-operation is now most needed. We are not in
the business of union-bashing. We cannot and will not compete with
our opponents in that game. Nor are we going to allow employees to
be made the scapegoats for Australia's present economic problems.
We are not going to ask employees to bear the whole brunt of our
attack upon these problems.
In other words we are not going to follow the policies of our
opponents, which they used in government time and time again and which
they would again use if they had the chance. But employees and their
associations do have to make a choice. We have to recognise that'
actions by unions and employees' associations can have a more damaging
effect upon a Labor Government than all the obstruction and
irresponsibility of our opponents. We can handle our opponents
but we need the co-operation of our supporters and those who claim
to support us.
It is thoroughly shortsighted if individual unions use their
muscle in certain key sectors of industry to win short-term
advantages at the expense of their fellow workers. In-the very
short term these may appear superficially attractive but no union,
still less small sections of any industrial union, can live in
isolation from the rest of the community. What happens to individual
unions ultimately affects the whole of the community, and equally
what happens to the whole community ultimately affects every
unionisnd his family.
Nor can employees ignore the threat which excessive wage claims
or unjustified strikes can make on their industry and their own
employment prospects. As Jim Cairns put it to the State Council
of the Victorian Branch of the Party last month: " In a year like
1974 the economy cannot possibly pay general wage increases of
and more without most of them going quickly into prices, and this
means more inflation." 
It can also mean and we must face the fact more
unemployment, especially in industries competing with imported
goods. What all of us in the Labor movement must remember is that
wage claims affect the ability of certain industries to compete with
imports. I know there are some unions and some industries where
wage claims can be dealt with in apparent isolation, where there
is no import competition and added cost of wages can be passed on
to the consumer. There are other industries, however, that are not
so fortunate. In those industries the cost of sudden and immoderate
wage increases cannot be passed on so easily. If they are passed on,
in higher prices, there is a real danger that the industries
will no longer be competitive. They will go to the wall, and jobs
will go with them.
So it is in the interests of all unions indeed, it is the
duty of all unions to ensure that wage claims in our present
economic climate are kept within reasonable and responsible limits..
And this is just as much the duty of unions in non-competitive
industries as it is in industries that are vulnerable to competition.
In fact it is the stronger and more fortunate unions that have the
higher duty the duty to set an example. For we know how tempting,
how human, how natural it is for anyone to seek to catch up with
other employees in other industries who receive a substantial
wage rise. And while I am not for a moment suggesting that no wage
claims are justified, that no one deserves any increase at all,
it is vitally important that wage claims are not made at the expense
of fellow-workers' jobs.
We look to the union movement, and particularly supporters of
the Government, to ensure that wage claims and industrial actions
are responsible. Disputes which affect other workers should be
promptly referred to central union bodies the Labor Councils and
the ACTU. In the interests of other unionists and in the public
interest disputes should be restricted to their proper role as a
last resort, not as the first shot in a process of negotiation.
With respect to wage claims we ask unionists to recognise that a
system of indexation will now be introduced, so that claims should
not now be made and do not need to be made in anticipation of
future price increases.
The only people who can effectively persuade unions to keep
their wages within safe and moderate limits are unionists themselves.
So I urge every man on the job and in the factory to exercise
caution, to remember above all his own and his fellow-workers,
livelihood. For that is precisely what is at stake.
Employees who want to keep a Labor Government should measure
the possible consequences of their actions, not only upon the fortunes
of the Government, but upon their fellow-unionists. And unionists who
want to keep a Labor Government should scrutinise the consequences
of some of their officials who are not Labor, who don't particularly
want a Labor Government, some of whom, indeed, correctly view a
Labor Government as the greatest force for democratic change and
social reform within the Parliamentary system. They reject the
system and therefore they reject our role in it. / 6 
-6
The question employees are certainly entitled to ask is why
they should support and co-operate with a Labor Government. It can
be answered at many levels from the narrowest point of view of
an employee's immediate self-interest to the widest considerations
of the national interest and the national good. We all know from
experience what the alternative is. We all know from experience
what methods a non-Labor Government would use by preference and
calculated design to combat inflation. It is the deliberate
creation of massive unemployment. We are not going to take you
down that road.
Look at the general attitude of our opponents to industrial
affairs over a generation. Never once in 23 years, whether there
was inflation or recession, did their Government fail to lend its
support to the employers in the national wage case. For 20 years
unions had been arguing for the re-introduction of wage indexation.
Only now have we a Government taking a positive attitude to the
question. We have made positive and constructive intervention
before the Arbitration Commission. Within hours of taking office
we re-opened the wage case to secure equal pay for women. Against
bitter opposition we have supported the ACTU policy on abolition of
the penal clauses and the amalgamation of unions. We have taken new
initiatives to protect employees by training and retraining programs
and structural adjustment assistance.
Two things are clearly implicit in our opponents' economic
proposals the creation of massive unemployment and the slashing
of basic public expenditure on schools, welfare, health and cities.
On both counts, employees and their families would be the first to
suffer. For most employees, community spending on these matters
the matters which are basic to the quality of their lives and the
lives of the members of their families'-is every bit as important
as their pay packets.
I want to emphasise as strongly as I can that the current
problem of inflation in no way downgrades the importance of our
Government's total program the program I announced in 1972, the
program I repeated in May 1974, the program once again endorsed
by the people in 1974.
On the contrary, the program is crucial to all our efforts
to protect all sections of the Australian community from the
buffets of economic chancgnd circumstance. The fight against
inflation and the implementation of our program will go on together.
They are not contradictory, they are complementary.
Economic management cannot be put into a compartment. It is
part of the whole process of building a stronger economy and
fairer society.
I have said repeatedly that the attack on inflation is a task
for the whole community. That is no mere slogan. We have had
distressing evidence of the failure of some State governments to
play their full part in an anti-inflationary program. it is certainly
not my intention to shuffle off any part of the Australian Government's
responsibility. I acknowledge that the primary responsibility is ours.
There are many things, however, that we simply cannot do on our own. / 7 
-7
One of them is the stabilisation of land prices. This objective
has been part of our policy from the beginning. It has been
discussed specifically and in detail with the Premiers on at
least six occasions. We put forward proposals at our meetings on
the Albury-Wodonga project at the beginning of last year. we
discussed it again at the special Premiers Conference in May
last year; again at the Constitutional Convention in Sydney in
September last year; again during the referendum campaign in
November and December last year; again at the Premiers Conference
in June of this year. In addition we have made individual approaches
to particular States. Remember that the escalating cost of land is
the greatest single component in the inflationary spiral. The States
have the power to deal with it: yet only one State, South Australia,
has made a serious attempt to co-operate with us. And their
efforts have already shown remarkably successful results. Let me
say in passing that I look forward to co-operating with a N. S. W.
Labor Government on this very issue. There is much that we will
achieve together, and there are many other areas -law reform,
the environment, civil liberties, to name a few -where a State
Labor Government is uniquely placed to legislate for essential reforms.
The real protection which individuals, not least employees,
have against economic mischance lies in the quality and equality of
the services and amenities which the community as a whole provides.
Wages and salaries are becoming less and less relevant in determining
a person's or a family's real welfare. No longer is a person's
income the sole measure of the quality of his life or his family's
life. The quality of his life is determined increasingly by the
things which the community acting as a whole provides for its
individual members, and what the community alone can adequately
provide. Increasingly, a person's standard of living is
determined not by his income but by where he lives and by the
community services provided by the community in which he lives.
His health, his children's education, his opportunities and his
leisure, his sense of security and his real security increasingly
depend on the community's ability or will to provide for them
to provide for the needs of individuals by collective decision
and action and to promote opportunities for individuals by
collective decision and action.
The Labor program the program of your Government is to
ensure that those facilities and opportunities are provided by
the community through its elected representatives more
abundantly and mo! 5e equally, for all Australians wherever they
live, wherever they choose to live or wherever they are obliged
to live. The nearer we approach our goal the further recedes the
threat of individual disaster through economic misfortune.
That is why we shall press on with our program. To abandon that
program is to abandon the hopes of those who have twice supported
us and twice elected us. We are not going to do it.
The fight against inflation will go on. it will be hard.
It will be won. The fight to implement our program, our elected
program, will go on. It will be hard. rt will be won. 
8-
From the very beginning of our term of office we have contended
with the problem of inflation. Let it never be forgotton that the
roots of our present inflation were present from the start the
result of a gross undervaluation of the dollar and a flood of foreign
money which our predecessors tolerated and encouraged. We have
worked ceaselessly, resourcefully, on many fronts, to contain
inflationary tendencies. For the past six days I have presided at
meetings of the Cabinet to determine every detail of our Budgetary
strategy. We reject all panic talk of crisis and doom. Average weekly
earnings today, despite inflation, are 3% higher than when we came
to office. There are 270,000 more people in the workforce 270,000
more jobs than there were a year ago. We reject the view that
the deliberate creation of unemployment is an acceptable remedy
for inflation or even a feasible remedy. We reject the view
that the Government's program of reform must be put aside while
the battle against inflation goes on.
We reject the view that the battle against inflation will be
wholly painless or, for that matter, intolerably harsh. It is
no more helpful or realistic to exaggerate the hardship entailed
by successful remedies than it is to ignore the hardship. And there
are those who exaggerate the hardship. There are companies who
belieave we must shelter them from the effects of competition, or
the consequences of their own mismanagement, to prevent people
buying goods more cheaply. We do not believe that everybody in
the community should be forced to pay more for textiles, or cars
or color TV sets than these goods are worth. Still less should
the unionist, the working man and his family, be required to pay
through the nose.
Above all, as realists, we must reject the view that some simple
magic solution, some single " package" of solutions call it what
You Will is the answer to our needs. The Government has acted and
will continue to act on many fronts, in many different ways.
Our program to fight inflation is a flexible one, not a set of
measures that make headlines for a day. It has included our monetary
policy to restrain excess liquidity. it has included revaluation of
the Australian dollar and tariff cuts. It has included attempts to
get clear and unequivocal constitutional authority over prices and
incomes. Remember that very little " fine tuning" is possible in
economic management. Governments can never be surd that their
policies will not have an impact on the economy beyond the level
they intended. when that happens and there are signs that it it
happening now we stand ready to adjust and rectify our calculations.
That is what responsible economic management means a capacity for
prompt and flexible response to changing circumstances. That is
why hard and fast rules and packages are irrelevant to our needs,
and indeed meaningless in any rational discussion of the problem.
Let me give two exampleof our successful response to particular
difficulties. You will remember the recent headlines when Leylands
sacked 1,000 workers. Yet within two weeks all but 50 of those
workers were placed in other jobs. That fact just as important
as the original sackings received almost no attention from the
media. Again, when the recent consumer price index for the June
quarter was issued it quite properly received wide coverage in
the press. I do not quibble with that. 
9-
I would have hoped however, that the same wide coverage might have
been given to the subsequent news of a fall in the food price index
the first since we came to power. That was largely accounted for by
a drop in meat prices. It was a result of a concerted and consistent
attack on meat prices by the Government over the past year. Our
actions were successful, but successful policies are unfortunately
less newsworthy than difficulties or problems.
The battle against inflation continues but it is not the only
battle. The Government's measures-to retard inflation will continue,
but they are not our only measures. Our opponents and some sections
of the press seem to suggest that every sphere of government activity
must come to a halt, that our every effort towards building a better
and stronger Australia should be set aside until Australia and all
comparable countries have solved this one problem of inflation.
This is self-defeating nonsense. Just as Australia's problem of
inflation cannot be taken out of the context of the world economic
situation so our efforts to combat inflation must be seen in the
context of our total effort, social as well as economic. The
business of government goes on and that business cannot be
confined to a single economic problem.
The deliberations of Cabinet last week must be seen in that
perspective the perspective of implementing our whole program.
Decisions of the highest importante are being made all the time.
In a single week just last week we have made decisions and
announcements of the greatest importance in addition to deciding
the framework for the Budget.
We approved the first grants ever to be made to reduce
inequalities between local government-areas in Australia. For the
first time since its creation in 1933, the Grants Commission has
recommended grants for local government areas. Our government,
which last year empowered the Commission to-recommend aid for local
government as it has always done for States, approved the granting
of more than $ 56M.
At the special sitting of the House of Representatives on
Friday we at last secured the passage of restrictive trade practices
legislation to prevent collusive price fixing. Because of the stalling
and obstruction of the Opposition, this law has been before the
Parliament for 11 months almost a year. It has been debated four
times in the Senate. But for the Opposition, it could already be
working effectively to reduce prices.
Again on Friday we were at last able to pass the law to provide
the basis for a national highway system and to involve the national
Government in planning for and paying for roads in our cities.
These are all decisions which, quite apart from their intrinsic
value, have a close bearing on the economic situation. They are all
part of our program to build a fairer and stronger Australian economy.
And this is our goal; this is the direction towards which we are
leading Australia towards building a fairer, stronger Australia,
an Australia providing greater equality of opportunities for all its
people and a greater abundance of these opportunities. We are not
going to be deterred from those goals, the goals set in the policy
speeches of 1972 and 1974, the goals adopted by the people of
Australia in 1972 and 1974. We are not going to be stampeded.
We are not going to be panicked. We have to recognise that there are
groups and interests who have a vested interest in spreading panic,~ 
10
suspicion and division. Rumour-mongering and scare-mongering is
their stock in trade. We saw appalling examples of it last week.
The hysteria of our opponents who cannot accept their double
defeat must not be allowed to infect the Australian community.
We are certainly not going to allow it to infect the Australian
Labor Government. We do have serious problems. We share these
problems with all comparable countries. We are better placed than
most comparable countries to overcome these problems. We are going
to do so. It won't be done by grand-standing. it won'It be done
by panic, it won't be done by hysteria. It will be done by a cool,
steady, confident government given the co-operation of an
intelligent, responsible community. It will be done by this
Government, this Labor Government which you all have worked for over
so many years and which, given your help and co-operation, wvill lcng
corti. nue to vrork for the true advancement of all the Austral ian
peop 0.. In December 1972 the Labor Party and the entire Labor
movement won a great victory a deserved and long-awaited victory.
Just over three months ago the result was conf~ irmed by the Australian
people in the election of 18 May.
Let us remember why we worked for those victories, and why
the people gave us their support.
I ask you to remember the kind of society we rejected.. in
December 1972 the attitudes and habits we put behind us*.
We rejected complacency. W-e rejected inequality. We rejected
poverty, injustice and fear. We rejected the chronic stagnation
and ' impoverishment of our schools, an unjust and inefficient health
service, miserly pension schemes and social service handouts
that condemned thousands of Australians to hardship and indignity.
We rejected dikapidated cities, antiquated public transport, and
the pollution and destruction of the natural environment. We rejected
Vietnam and conscription. We rejected unemployment as a deliberate
weapon of economic policy. We rejected penal clauses and the whole
apparatus of union intimidation. We rejected the long history of
neglect of the weak and deprived the pensioners, Aboriginals,
migrants and working women. We rejected the takeover of our industries
and resources by foreign interests. We rejected a foreign
policy that stifled our national independence and bound us to
military entanglements and cold-war ideologies.
Such were the attitudes and philosophies we put behind us.
For the millions of Australians who supported us, the election of
December 1972 was indeed a vote for change, for new directions, for
new policies. For those of us in the Party, however, it was more
than that. It was the fulfilment of long-cherished hopes and
dreams, the culmination of years of work and planning by devoted
men and women who were determined on a better and brighter future
for Australia. We must keep those goals before us. By working together
and only by working together we will achieve them. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME INISTER,
THE 0E. G. HITLA],
TO THE ITALIANCOMIITTEE OF COORDINATION
FOR THE LAUNCHING OF ITALIAN WEEK 1975
' ELBOURNE, SATURDAY, 31 AUGUST 197'!.
IT IS A RARE PLEASURE IN 1974 TO BE LAUNCHING ITALIAN
WEEK 1975. I WISH WE COULD PLAN POLITICAL EVENTS WITH THE.
SAME CERTAINTY. THIS IS THE FIRST IMPORTANT FUNCTION OF THE
ITALIAN COMMUNITY I HAVE ATTENDED IN lIELBOURNE SINCE BECOMING
PRIME MINISTER, IT WILL CERTAINLY NOT BE THE LAST.
AUSTRALIANS NEED NO REMINDER OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE
ITALIAN COMMUNITY TO OUR SOCIETY. ACKNOWLEDGE IT. WE ARE
GRATEFUL FOR IT, IT IS IMPORTANT, HOWEVER, TO PROVIDE THE
FULLEST OPPORTUNITY FOR CONTACTS BETWEEN OLD AUSTRALIANS AND
THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY AND BETWEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA THEMSELVES
IN THE FIELDS OF ART, CULTURE, EDUCATION AND COMMERCE. ITALIAN
!' IEEK THEREFORE HAS A VALUABLE FUNCTION. THERE IS NO OTHER
COMPARABLE NATIONAL CELEBRATION IN THIS COUNTRY. IT IS
FITTING THAT WE SHOULD HONOUR THE LARGEST AND THE OLDEST OF THE
EUROPEAN MIGRANT COMMUNITIES IN AUSTRALIA. ' ITH THE EXCEPTION
OF THE BRITISH, NO MIGRANT IS MORE ACCEPTED, MORE RESPECTED OR
MORE ADMIRED THAN THE ITALIAN. 
-2-
AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH ITALY GO BACK TO THE BEGINNINGS
OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION ON THIS CONTINENT. THE FIRST ITALIANS
TO SET FOOT ON AUSTRALIAN SOIL MAY WELL HAVE BEEN ANTONIO PONTO
AND JAMES MARIO MlATRA, BOTH OF WHOM SAILED IN CAPTAIN COOK'S
' ENDEAVOUR;". IN 1793 THE TUSCAN MlARQUIS ALESSANDRO M'ALASPINA
LED AN EXPEDITION WHICH ENTERED BOTANY BAY, IN 1.352
GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI, THE GREAT ITALIAN PATRIOT AND FIGHTER
FOR THE UNIFICATION OF ITALY, IN COMMAND OF THE BRIG CARMEN'.
WEIGHED ANCHOR OFF TASMANIA. HE LATER WROTE NOSTALGICALLY
OF THE HAVEN OF PEACE AND BEAUTY HE FOUND THERE FAR FROM THE
TURMOIL OF EUROPE,
THE FIRST ITALIAN EMIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA WERE ATTRACTED
BY THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE 1350s, THROUGHOUT THE 1050S
AND 1360S A STEADY STREAM OF ITALIANS ARRIVED IN SOUTH EASTERN
AUSTRALIA, AND IN 1370 THE ITALIAN CONSUL IN " IELBOURNE ESTIMATED
THEIR NUMBER AT AROUND 1,0' 01. MOST WERE NORTHERN ITALIANS
FROM SONDRIO AND NEARBY PROVINCES OF LOMBARDY; SOME WERE FROM
PIEDMONT AND GENOA; A VERY FEW WERE FROM SOUTHERN ITALY AND
SICILY. MOST OF THE LOMBARDS WENT TO THE GOLD FIELDS AND SOME
K MADE THEIR FORTUNES IN WALHALLA AND HEPBURN. OTHERS LEFT THE
DIGGINGS TO BECOME FARMERS, OTHERS MOSTLY FROM GENOA, * iAPLES
AND SICILY, WORKED AS SAILORS AND STEVEDORES IN THE COASTAL
SHIPPING TRADE, OR AS FISHERMEN. 914 / 3 
-3
AMONG THE VERY EARLY ARRIVALS WERE THE CHALK-FIGURINE
MAKERS FROM LUCCA AND THE VIGGIANESE STREET-MUSICIANS. THE
HISTORIAN F, LANCASTER JONES HAS POINTED OUT THAT TODAY THERE ARE
THREE GREAT CENTRES OF VIGGIANESE CULTURE VIGGIANO, IEW YORK
AND fIELBOURNE. HE HAS WRITTEN: " INTERESTINGLY ENOUGHT IT WAS
PROBABLY THESE MUSICIANS WHO PLAYED A PROGRAM OF ITALIAN MUSIC
AT THE INAUGURATION OF MELBOURNE'S DANTE ALIGHIERI SOCIETY IN
AUGUST 139E, A SHORT SEVEN YEARS AFTER THE FOUNDATION OF THE
PARENT SOCIETY IN ITALY, FOR IELBOURNE WAS THEN THE CULTURAL
CENTRE OF AUSTRALIA, AND ITALY THE CULTURAL CENTRE OF THE WORLD,
BY THE TURN OF THE CENTURY THERE WERE 6,09 ITALIANS IN
AUSTRALIA, BETWEEN THE CENSUSES OF 1921 AND 1933 THE NUMBER OF
ITALIAN-BORN IN AUSTRALIA INCREASED THREE-FOLD TO MORE THAN
2C, 000. SINCE 1945, AS A RESULT OF LARGE-SCALE ITALIAN
IMMIGRATION, 165,000 ITALIANS HAVE BECOME AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS
AND THERE ARE TODAY WELL OVER A QUARTER OF A MILLION
ITALIAN--BORN PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN CITIES ABOUND IN EVIDENCE OF ITALIAN WORK AND
INFLUENCE. MUSIC WAS NURSED BY ITALIAN TEACHERS OF COMPOSITION,
INSTRUMENTS AND BEL CANTO; PERFORMERS, SINGERS, MAESTRI. FOUNDERS
OF SCHOOLS, AND OF CHAMBER AND SYMPHONIC ORCHESTRAS. ALBERTO
ZELMAN FOUNDED THE VICTORIAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA, PIETRO CECCHI
TAUGHT DAME NELLIE ! MELBA; VITELLI FOUNDED ALAN'S HOUSE OF ' IUSIC.
COUNT CARANDINI MADE A FAMOUS PRIMADONNA OF HIS TASMANIAN--BORN WIFI
MARY BURGESS, A RELATIVE OF SHELLEY. CLAUDIO ALCORSO, TILL RECENTI
CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN OPERA COMPANY, AND NOW A MEMBER OF THE
UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION, WAS KNIGHTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
ITALIAN REPUBLIC. ,/ 4 
4
A LONG LINE OF ARTISTS EXTENDS FROM BRAMBILLA, A VERY
EARLY SETTLER, TO ANTONIO DATTILO-RUBBO, WHO FOR MANY YEARS
CONDUCTED ONE OF THE LEADING ART SCHOOLS IN SYDNEY AND WHO
TAUGHT, INFLUENCED AND ENCOURAGED A GENERATION OF PAINTERS.
MONTEFIERE WAS ONE OF THE FOUNDERS OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES ACADEMY
OF ART IN 1371. WELL-KNOWN CONTEMPORARY ARTISTS INCLUDE
ERNESTO MURGO, A VICTORIAN SCULPTOR WITH HIS OWN ART GALLERY,
WHO LECTURES IN SCULPTURE AT THE MELBOURNE TECHNICAL COLLEGE.
FRANCO BELGIORNO-NJETTIS, AN ENGINEER WHO CAME TO AUSTRALIA
9 IN 1951, IS ALSO AN ARTIST AND SCULPTOR. THE TRANSFIELD
ENGINEERING GROUP, OF WHICH HE IS ONE OF THE PRINCIPALS, IS
O NOTED NOT ONLY FOR HEAVY STEEL CONSTRUCTION BUT FOR ITS PATRONAGE
OF THE ARTS. THE TRANSFIELD PRIZE HAS BEEN FOR MANY YEARS ONE
OF THE BEST-ENDOWED ART AWARDS IN AUSTRALIA. IN 1973 TRANSFIELD
SURPASSED ITS PREVIOUS CONTRIBUTIONS WITH THE ORGANISATION OF THE
FIRST SYDNEY BIENNALE, HELD IN THE OPERA HlOUSE.
o CARLO CATANI CAME TO AUSTRALIA IN THE 1379s AND
AS CHIEF ENGINEER FOR THE VICTORIAN PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, WAS
O RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CREATION OF THE ALEXANDRA GARDENS AND ST.
KILDA ROAD. THE CATANI TOWER OF ST. KILDA AND LAKE CATANI, ON
MOUNT BUFFALO, WERE NAMED AFTER HIM. ETTORE CHECCHI, A
CONTEMPORARY OF CATANI'S AND ALSO AN ENGINEER FOR THE VICTORIAN
GOVERNMENT, IS NOTED FOR HIS EXPLORATION OF THE UPPER NIURRAY AS
WELL AS FOR HIS CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PLANNING OF THE IUME
RESERVOIR. THERE HAVE BEEN FAMOUS PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS LIKE
FIASCHI; SCIENTISTS LIKE THE ASTRONOMER BARACCHI; GREAT FAMILIES
SUCH AS THE CILENTOS. RAFFAELLE CARBONI, AN HISTORIAN AND EX-SCHO
TEACHER, WENT DOWN IN HISTOPY AS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADERS AT THE
EUREKA STOCKADE IN 1854. 
lORE RECENTLY, IN ADDITION TO THE SKILLS OF ITALIAN
IMMIGRANTS, WE HAVE HAD THE EXAMPLE OF TWO GREAT ITALIAN
ENTERPRISES WHOSE ACTIVITIES HAVE BEEN A MODEL AND IN MANY
WAYS AN INSPIRATION FOR THE POLICIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. I REFER TO ENTE NAZIONALE IDROCARBURI ( ElII) AND
THE INSTITUTO PER PA RICOSTRUZIONE INDUSTRIALE ( IRI).
WITH THEIR WORK AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN MIND WE HAVE SOUGHT TO
EXTEND THE ACTIVITIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION AND ESTABLISHED THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS AUTHORITY,
ALL OF US KNOW WHAT ITALIAN MIGRANTS HAVE DONE FOR
AUSTRALIA THE BENEFITS AND SKILLS, THE VITALITY AND ENERGY
THEY HAVE BROUGHT TO OUR WAY OF LIFE. ONLY RECENTLY, HOWEVER,
HAVE AUSTRALIANS FULLY ACCEPTED THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES TO
MIGRANTS AND RECOGNISED A DEEP AND CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO
THEM. RECENTLY THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED THAT THERE SHOULD NO
LONGER BE A SEPARATE DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION, FAR FROM
DOWNGRADING THE VALUE WE PLACE ON MIGRANTS OR IMMIGRATION,
THAT DECISION RECOGNISED THAT MIGRANTS MUST BE TREATED IN
EVERY WAY AS FULL AND EQUAL CITIZENS. IT HAS BEEN TOO EASY
IN THE PAST TO PUT MIGRANTS IN SEPARATE COMPARTMENTS, IN
SPECIAL CATEGORIES, AND SHUFFLE OFF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM
TO THE STATES OR TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS. [ NOW AT LAST WE HAVE
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT MIGRANT CITIZENS ARE AUSTRALIANS IN EVERY WAY,
AND THEIR RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES, THEIR DUTIES, THEIR PROBLEMS
AND THEIR NEEDS ARE NO DIFFERENT IN PRINCIPLE FROM THOSE OF
ANYONE ELSE. 
THIS DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE HAVE ABANDONED OUR CONCERN
FOR MIGRANTS. IT DOES NOT MEAN THAT WE NO LONGER FEEL A SPECIAL
OBLIGATION TO THEM. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THEIR
HAPPINESS, THEIR SECURITY OR THEIR FUTURE THAN WE HAVE.
UNDER THE OLD ARRANGEMENTS IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE FOR A
RELATIVELY SMALL DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION TO DEAL ADEQUATELY WITH
SUCH DIVERSE MATTERS AS SETTLEMENT, WELFARE, EDUCATION, CITIZENSHIP
AND POPULATION. THE DEPARTMENT SIMPLY DID NOT HAVE THE PHYSICAL
OR FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO HANDLE THESE MATTERS. IT LACKED THE
POWER TO PERFORM MANY OF THESE FUNCTIONS ADEQUATELY. SOCIAL
SECURITY BENEFITS FOR MIGRANTS OR THE IN-SCHOOL EDUCATION OF
MIGRANT CHILDREN WERE ESSENTIALLY FUNCTIONS OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
REMEMBER THAT BEFORE LABOR CAME TO POWER THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ADOPTED A VERY LIMITED ROLE IN SUCH AREAS AS EDUCATION
AND URBAN AFFAIRS. IN THE FIELD OF SOCIAL SECURITY, ITS MAIN
TASK WAS TO GIVE OUT PENSIONS AND OTHER WELFARE BENEFITS.
IN ALL THESE AREAS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S ROLE HAS NOW
CHANGED RADICALLY. IN EDUCATION WE ARE SEEKING TO ELIMINATE
AREAS OF DISADVANTAGE, . TO PROVIDE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN, NOT JUST TO HAND OUT ARBITRARY PER CAPITA
PAYMENTS. IN SOCIAL SECURITY, THROUGH THE SOCIAL WVELFARE
COMMISSION AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE P LAN, WE ARE TRYING TO
ESTABLISH COMMUNITY WELFARE FACILITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS. IN
SHORT WE HAVE BECOME AN INITIATOR, AN ACTIVIST IN THESE FIELDS
IN A WAY THAT NO PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD ATTEMPTED.
s i i 
5B
IT IS ONLY LOGICAL THAT, IN LINE WITH THIS EXPANDED
ROLE, MIGRANT AFFAIRS SHOULD COME WITHIN THE PURVIEW OF THE
RELEVANT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS, IF THE DEPARTMENT
OF EDUCATION IS TO TACKLE GENUINELY THE PROBLEMS OF THE
DISADVANTAGED IN OUR SCHOOLS IT CANNOT IGNORE MIGRANT
EDUCATION, IF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE
SOCIAL WELFARE COMMISSION ARE TO RESTRUCTURE OUR WELFARE
SYSTEM EFFECTIVELY THEY CANNOT IGNORE THE WELFARE NEEDS OF
MIGRANTS, THE SOONER WE SEE MIGRANT NEEDS AS PART OF THE
OVERALL NEEDS OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, THE SOONER THOSE
NEEDS WILL BE MET BY THE BODIES WITH THE APPROPRIATE STAFF,
FACILITIES, FINANCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES,
THE GOVERNMENT'S EMPHASIS IS NOT ON MERE NUMBERS OF
MIGRANTS BUT ON THE WELFARE OF MIGRANTS. WE BELIEVE M'IGRANTS MUST
HAVE THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES AS ALL OTHER AUSTRALIANS TO LEAD A
FULL AND HAPPY LIFE AS FULL AND EQUAL CITIZENS, IN PARTICULAR
WE BELIEVE THE EMPHASIS IN AN IMMIGRATION PROGRAM SHOULD BE
ON THE REUNION OF FAMILIES, S/ 
THE MOST DRAMATIC RESULT OF OUR POLICIES HAS
BEEN TO CHECK THE FLOW OF' DISILLUSIONED AND DISAPPOINTED
MIGRANTS LEAVING AUSTRALIA, PLACING FAMILY REUNION FOR MIGRANTS
ABOVE MERE RECRUITING,, WE HAVE STOPPED THE MIGRANT DRIFT.
THE NUMBER OF MIGRANTS WHO BECAME AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS IN 1973
INCREASED By 485 PER CENT OVER 1972, p AND THE NUMBER RETURNING
TO THEIR COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN DECLINED FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN NINE YEARS. THESE FIGURES ARE DEEPLY GRATIFYING TO THE GOVERNMENT.
THEY SHOW THAT WE ARE MAKING MIGRANTS HAPPIER AND MORE CONTENTED
CITIZENS, WITH WIDER OPPORTUNITIES TO SHARE IN THE BENEFITS OF
AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY. IN EFFECT, WE ARE SAYING IT IS NOT THE
GOVERNMENT THAT SHOULD DECIDE WHO WILL COME To AUSTRALIA AS
MIGRANTS, BUT MIGRANTS THEMSELVES. IA NEW CITIZEN WHO HAS SETTLED
HAPPILY IN AUSTRALIA IS THE BEST PERSON TO RECOMMEND OTHERS TO
JOIN HIM. VIE ARE BRINGING FAMILIES TOGETHER, AND WE ARE
BUILDING UP OUR MIGRANT POPULATION ON THE ONLY PROPER BASIS
A BASIS OF HUMANITY AND COMPASSION.
THE AIM OF OUR'POLICIES IS TO PROMOTE THE SECURITY OF
MIGRANTS AND'REMOVE THE CAUSES OF NEEDLESS FEAR, FOR EVERY NEW
CITIZEN IN A NEW LAND THERE ARE NATURAL SOURCES OF ANXIETY.
THERE ARE LANGUAGE PROBLEMS, PROBLEMS OF LONELINESS, HOMESICKNESS
AND ISOLATION.. THERE ARE WORRIES ABOUT EMPLOYMENT AND HOUSING.
THERE ARE UNFAMILIAR LAWS. THERE IS, PERHAPS, A FEAR OF
DEPORTATION. THERE IS A FEAR THAT HE MAY NEVER BE ABLE TO RETURN
TO THE LAND OF HIS BIRTH OR REJOIN HIS LOVED ONES IN OLD AGE.
THERE IS A FEAR THAT, IF HE DOES LEAVE AuSTRALIA, HE WILL BE
PENALISED FOR DOING SO THROUGH THE LOSS OF SOCIAL SERVICE ENTITLEMENT s. e t17 
-7
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS WORKED VIGOROUSLY TO
REMOVE THESE CAUSES OF FEAR. ', 1E HAVE M1ADE GREAT PROGRESS. ONE
OF OUR GREAT REFORMS HAS BEEN TO INTRODUCE THE PRINCIPLE OF
PORTABLE PENSION RIGHTS. UNDER LEGISLATION PASSED BY THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT, PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA RECEIVING AGE AND INVALID PENSIONS,
INCLUDING WIVES'I OR WIDOWS I PENSIONS, ARE ABLE TO RECEIVE THOSE
IN ANY COUNTRY WHERE THEY CHOOSE TO LIVE. THE NEW LEGISLATION
IS BENEFITING AGED, INVALID AND WIDOWED MIGRANTS WHO WISH TO
RETURN TO THEIR FORMER HOMELANDS. IT APPLIES EQUALLY TO ALL
RECIPIENTS OF PENSIONS, INCLUDING THOSE BORN IN AUSTRALIA,
WHO WISH TO LIVE ABROAD.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH FOR THE LAST ELECTION I PROMISED
ANOTHER VERY IMPORTANT REFORM FOR MIGRANTS. THE PRESENT
INCOME TAX LAW ALLOWS CONCESSIONAL DEDUCTIONS FOR DEPENDANTS
To AUSTRALIAN RESIDENT TAXPAYERS ONLY WHERE THE DEPENDANTS
ARE THEMSELVES RE SIDENT IN AUSTRALIA, IN THE CASE OF A MIGRANT
WHO COMES To AUSTRALIA INTENDING TO BRING HIS WIFE AND CHILDREN
OUT TO THIS COUNTRY AS SOON AS HE HAS MADE A HOME FOR THEM, A
PERIOD OF FIVE YEARS IS REGARDED AS A REASONABLE TIME FOR THE
WIFE AND CHILDREN TO JO'IN THE MIGRANT IN AUSTRALIA. IF HE
MAINTAINS THE FAMILY DURING THIS PERIOD INCOME TAX DEDUCTIONS FOR THE
DEPENDANTS ARE ALLOWABLE TO HIM. 
HOWEVER, MIGRANTS WHO ARE MAINTAINING DEPENDENT
RELATIVES OVERSEAS WITH NO VIEW TO BRINGING THEM TO AUSTRALIA,
OR WHO MAY BE PREVENTED FROM BRINGING THEM To AUSTRALIA BY
RESTRICTIVE EMIGRATION POLICIES IN FORCE IN SOME COUNTRIES, ARE
UNABLE TO QUALIFY FOR A TAX DEDUCTION FOR DEPENDANTS. THE
GOVERNMENT WILL EXTEND THE PROVISIONS OF THE INCOME TAX LAWS
GOVERNING DEPENDANTS'I DEDUCTIONS TO ENTITLE PEOPLE IN THESE
SITUATIONS TO THE TAXATION ADVANTAGES AVAILABLE ALREADY TO
ALL OF US MAINTAINING DEPENDENT RELATIVES WHO RESIDE IN
AUSTRALIA. LABOR'S CONCERN. FOR MIGRANTS IS A CONTINUING CONCERN.
IT FLOWS FROM OUR WHOLE SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY, IT IS NOT SOMETHING
DISCOVERED ONLY AT ELECTION TIME.
W'E HAVE STANDARDISED THE REQUIREMENTS FOR CITIZ7ENSHIP
SO THAT EVERY MIGRANT SEEKING AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP CAN DO SO
IRRESPECTIVE OF NATIONAL ORIGINS AND UNDER CONDITIONS APPLYING
EQUALLY TO ALL. THE PERIOD OF RESIDENCE IS NOW THREE YEARS
FOR EVERYONE. WE HAVE AMENDED THE CRIMES ACT SO THAT IT IS NO LONGER
POSSIBLE FOR AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS INCLUDING, OF COURSE,
NATURALIZED MIGRANTS TO BE DEPORTED, TASK FORCES HAVE BEEN
ESTABLISHED IN ALL STATE CAPITALS TO IDENTIFY THE MOST URGENT
SETTLEMENT PROBLEMS CONFRONTING MIGRANTS. EACH IS CHAIRED BY A
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT AND INCLUDES PEOPLE IN DAY-TO-DAY CONTACT
WITH MIGRANTS AND THEIR NEEDS, 
9-
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SET UP A COMMUNITY ' RELAT IONS
COMMITTEE OF THE IMMIGRATION ADVISORY COUNCIL TO INQUIRE INTO
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST MIGRANTS, EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANTS AND
THEIR USE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES.
AUSTRALIA'S FIRST TELEPHONE SERVICE IN 20 LANGUAGES
HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED IN THE CAPITAL CITIES TO ANSWER EMERGENCY
PLEAS FOR HELP FROM MIGRANTS.
MiIGRANT EDUCATION CENTRES HAVE BEEN OPENED IN PERTH.,
BRISBANE, MELBOURNEj SYDNEY AND ADELAIDE.
BJY MEANS OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, THE
GOVERNMENT IS SEEKING TO INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN PLANNING
THEIR WELFARE SERVICES. THE PLAN HAS SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE FOR
ITALIAN MIGRANTS BECAUSE IT PROVIDES THEM WITH AN OPPORTUNITY TO
PARTICIPATE WITH OTHER AUSTRALIANS IN ESTABLISHING WELFARE
PRIORITIES AND LOCAL COMMUNITY NEEDS. TO HELP EXPLAIN THE PLAN
TO MIGRANTS, THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY IS PREPARING AN
EXPLANATORY LEAFLET FO. R ITALIAN PEOPLE AND OTHER MIGRANT GROUPS.
HERE IS ONE SMALL BENEFIT THAT I KNOW WILL PLEASE MANY
OF YOU. YESTERDAY THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL ANNOUNCED THAT, FROM
TOMORROW, THE MINIMUM CHARGE FOR A 3-MINUTE TELEPHONE CALL
FROM AUSTRALIA TO ITALY WILL BE REDUCED FROM $ 1-~ TO $-D 
6 p 10
I BELIEVE AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT IMMIGRATION POLICIES
ARE A RETURN TO THE HUMANITARIAN IDEALS THAT INSPIRED THE
MIGRATION PROGRAM NEARLY 30 YEARS AGO, lE ARE DETERMINED THAT
MEN AND WOMEN FROM OTHER NATIONS WHO HAVE SHOWN THEIR FAITH
IN AUSTRALIA WILL HAVE THAT FAITH REWARDED AND RESTORED,
MIGRANTS WILL BENEFIT AS MUCH AS OTHER AUSTRALIANS I REMIND
YOU THAT MIGRANTS WILL BENEFIT LIKE EVERYONE ELSE FROM THE
GOVERNMENT'S REFORMS IN HEALTHj HOUSINGi THE ENVIRONMENTj
THE CITIES AND EDUCATION ESPECIALLY EDUCATION, IT WILL
NO LONGER BE NECESSARY FOR SCHOOL PRINCIPALS TO RESIGN IN
PROTEST BECAUSE OF THE POOR CONDITIONS FOR MIGRANT EDUCATION
IN AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS,
I AM GRATEFUL FOR THE OUTSTANDING CONTRIBUTION
MIGRANTS AND ESPECIALLY ITALIANS HAVE MADE TO AUSTRALIA'S
PROGRESS, I LOOK TO THEM TO HELP US BUILD A GREATER AUSTRALIA
FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE A MORE HUMANEj TOLERANT, JUST AND
BOUNTIFUL SOCIETY, WE ARE DETERMINED THAT MIGRANTS WILL
SHARE FULLY IN THE PRESENT PROSPERITY AND FUTURE PROMISE OF
THE NATION THEY HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO DEVELOP AND ENRICH, 



EMBARGO: 3.00 P. M.
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE MAROONDAH SOCIAL HEALTH CENTRE, RINGWOOD,
MELBOURNE, SUNDAY 1 SEPTEMBER 1974
One of the greatest areas of inequality which exists
in Australia is in the field of health care. Too many areas
lack adequate hospitals and too many people don't have ready
access to the services of doctors and other skilled medical
workers. The provision of medical services has simply not kept
pace with the changes in our society. This applies particularly
in our cities. Hospitals, doctors and other services are spread
unevenly and unfairly. They tend to be clustered in long-established
and generally affluent areas. In contrast, people in newer and
frequently disadvantaged areas have not had-proper access to the
amount of high-quality care on which all Australians should be
able to depend. It is quite wrong that people in some areas of our
cities should only have to travel a few miles to receive treatment
at a major hospital, while other people in the same metropolis
are faced with journeys of 20 miles or more to get this treatment.
It is equally wrong that people in some areas should have available
a more than sufficient number of doctors to provide medical
treatment while people in other areas suffer a shortage of doctors.
It has been clear for some years that not enough
would be done to overcome-these inequalities until the Australian
Government, the national government, assumed a greater responsibility
for the provision of hospital and medical services throughout the
nation. It is for this reason that the present Government last
year initiated an urgent and thorough examination of the nation's
health services. A Hospitals and Health Services Interim
Committee, which later became by statute the Hospitals and Health
Services Commission, was appointed to investigate, report on,
and recommend necessary action to overcome both immediate and longterm
problems. The objective of the Commission is:
" The provision of high-quality, readily accessible,
reasonably comprehensive, co-ordinated and efficient
health and related welfare services at local, regional,
State and national levels."
Acting on the recommendations of the Commission the
Government has already started moving towards the satisfaction
of this objective. In the last financial year, for example,
we allocated $ 4.5 million to meet urgent needs for additional
hospitals in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane. 
Perhaps the most exciting initiatives have been taken in
the field of community health services. In 1973 the Government
adopted as a statement of policy and principle the recommendations
contained in the report entitled " A Community Health Program for
Australia", prepared by the Hospitals and Health Services
Interim Committee. In addition to the community health program
based on that report, it introduced the Mental Health and Related
Services Assistance Act last year to provide the basis for its
separate, but closely associated, community mental health,
alcoholism and drug dependency program. Both programs were
introduced by the Government to foster the development of a high
standard of community-based health care services. They were in
accordance with the Government's announced health policy of
providing regionally organised, community-based services with
greater emphasis on health education, prevention and rehabilitation,
and as a real alternative to hospital and other high-cost health
resources. A total of $ 17.5 million was allocated under these programs
in 1973/ 74. This consisted of $ 10 million under the community
health program and $ 7.5 million under the community mental health,
alcoholism and drug dependency program. A further $ 7.5 million is
available under the latter program in 1974/ 75, after which it will
be encompassed in the more broadly based community health program.
The majority of projects approved under both programs in 1973/ 74
will be operated by State health authorities. However, a
significant number of volunteer and community organisations have
also received Australian Government financial assistance.
The Maroondah Social Health Centre is a good example of a
community-based service which has received the Government's assistance.
The centre had its origins in the St. Stephen's ( Methodist-Presbyterian)
Social Health Board and was formed as a voluntary benevolent organisatio
at a public meeting at Ringwood on 5 November 1973. Its aim is to
help overcome the deficiency in services dealing with emotional and
psychiatric problems in this area of suburban Melbourne. The
Australian Government first became involved in assisting the project
in April when the Minister for Health, Dr. Everingham, approved a
grant of $ 10,500 to cover salaries and wages at the centre unti).
the end of the 1973/ 74 financial year. A further grant of $ 9,000
was approved in July for the first quarter of the new financial year.
Since that allocation was made the Government has been
considering further assistance. In its deliberations it has benefited
from the representations made by the member for the federal electorate
of Casey, Mr. Race Mathews, on behalf of the Centre. As a result I
am able to announce that the Government has allocated $ 27,908 towards
the project for the last three quarters of 1974/ 75. This includes
$ 23,640 for salaries and $ 1,462 for the rent of the premises from
which the service operates.
This assistance forms part of an integrated network of
community services being developed by the Government in the eastern
suburbs of Melbourne. In the last month the Minister for Health has
approved another substantial allocation to help in the development
of these services. He approved the allocation of $ 600,000 to the
Victorian Hospitals and Charities Commission to buy a private hospital
in Ringwood which is being converted to a day hospital, rehabilitation
centre and short-term hostel for physically handicapped people the
first such facility to be provided in the eastern suburbs. 
-3-
I believe that an important lesson can be drawn from these
allocations. They demonstrate the Government's continuing commitment
to major reform in the provision of health and other services.
In view of the current economic difficulties facing Australia,
some people may have begun to doubt that continuing commitment.
They may have begun to think that inflation and related economic
problems would cripple our program of reform. Some may have begun
to think that the effect of our current economic problems might be
to prevent the present Government from making any significant
difference to our society.
I want to affirm now that our program of reform will continue.
I want to affirm now that we will continue to work towards the
eradication of the kind of inequalities that I have described in
relation to health services. If anyone doubts that a sufficiently
determined Government can make a difference in these areas, they
should ask the people of Deer Park in Melbourne of the benefits they
have received from their new community health centre. If anyone
doubts the difference that can be made, they should ask the people of
Caufield of the extra services that have been made possible by our
assistance to the Caufield Community Care Centre. Equally they could
check on the benefits that have flowed from the establishment of
health centres at Ingle Farm and Clovelly Park in Adelaide. They
could also seek the opinion of the thousands of people who are
receiving new ancillary health services in the Illawarra region
south of Sydney or in the western metropolitan region of Sydney itself.
The Government has demonstrated that it can make a difference
in the provision of health services in these and many other areas.
Despite any economic problems we might face, we will continue to
demonstrate that difference. Our commitment to reform does not,
of course, apply only to health services. We have already transformed
the funding of education at all levels. That transformation will
continue. We have already begun in Albury/ Wodonga the first major
program of decentralisation in this country. That program will continue.
We have already begun to inject large sums of national finance into
our ailing urban transport system. That injection will continue.
In the last fortnight we have announced the provision of $ 56 million
to councils to help reduce inequalities between local government
regions. That drive against inequality will continue. And we have
made it quite clear that we will go ahead with the greatly expanded
program for the care and education of pre-school children.
The present Government believes that major reforms cannot be
achieved in any of these: areas without its involvement, without
national involvement. The States by themselves simply don't have the
trwidis to oii' about the chancres that are ncn. dec. The national Government
does have these funds and any. current economic problems will not prevent
it from bringing about improvements in essential services. Our
dedication remains to the creation of the best community services
that the country can afford.
There are those who are quick to criticise government spending.
There are those who would argue that at a time of economic difficulty
we should cut back on all our programs. Nothing could be more short
sighted. Indeed, if we accept that wage and salary increases are part
of the inflationary problem, we should see these programs as helping
to counter that problem. / 4 
-4-
For, if we can provide a range of community services
to satisfy the reasonable needs of all citizens and to create
reasonable opportunities for all citizens, we will have taken
a step towards reducing what might be termed the incomes mentality that
is so prevalent in our society. Our aim here is to enable people
not to have to look to their individual earning power to satisfy
so many of their basic needs.
The meeting of these needs by providing adequate
services must depend on Government action. An increased wage
alone is not going to ensure that a worker's children will receive
a proper education. An increased wage will not guarantee access
by that worker's family to high-quality medical and hospital care
at a reasonable cost. An increased wage will not grant him adequate
transport, roads, child care facilities, recreation outlets and
the like, In turn, if that worker can look to the Government to
provide these facilities and services, he will not be so dependent
on seeking ever-increasing wages.
Thus, our program of reform can fulfil two purposes.
It can help reduce inequality in our society. At the same time
it can help produce economic stability. The current economic
climate will not stop the Government from pursuing and achieving
these twin goals. 


3 September 1974
I felt some apprehension when the Mayor arrived in a Roman chariot this morning. It occurred to me that a right-wing extremist might come up on a white charger to beat me to the ribbon.
This is a splendid new shopping centre with its arcades and concourses it bears a remarkable similarity to the ancient Roman forums. of course, the modern shopping centre is not just a collection of shops it includes-offices and places of leisure, recreation and enjoyment. It even has a children's playground. Sir Theo Kelly pioneered'child care facilities before governments. He doesn't have the problems of a federal system or the Treasury.
Stores have set a lead for Government and urban planners bytaking their services to the people. They have followed the trends of population. Many districts lack adequate schools, hospitals, sporting and -cultural facilities. Few districts lack adequate shopping facilities.
In my own electorate of Werriwa, including the two new stores in Phoenix Plaza, there are 11 Woolworths-stores.
With a constituency like that it's no wonder I've got a safe seat. The biggest problem in the next redistribution will be to give every electorate the-same number of Woolworths, Flemings and Safeways. If we can do that,. even the Country Party would be happy with the boundaries.
There are no fewer than 17 Woolworths establishments in the suburbs now covered by my electorate or falling within its previous boundaries. Unfortunately I wasn't invited to open any of them till I became Prime Minister.
In the '50s, before I became Deputy Leader, Woolworths was one of my regular clients, as Laurie Oakes records. Every Prime Minister needs a great store behind him. The vaunted association between Menzies and the Lloyd Jones gave respectability to each.
Woolworths have shown how an efficient private enterprise, attuned to the needs of its customers and to local communities, can-provide the highest standards of service and reduce retail charges to a minimum. Public enterprise must be organised on the same basis of efficiency.What we need in the battle against inflation are-more "special offers" on the railways, more " discount prices" on the buses.
Woolworths are an all-Australian company 98% of the stock is held by Australians and New Zealanders. It gives first preference to Australian industry -  93% of its goods are bought in Australia. It employs more than 30,000 Australians and gives indirect employment to thousands more in primary and secondary industry. It has aided national development by establishing stories in remote and unprofitable regions  - The Snowy Mountains, Gove,Kambalda. It has brought the benefits of big-city shopping to Darwin, Mount Isa, Alice Springs, Broken Hill and Esperance.
Woolworths came to Liverpool 16 years ago and was burnt down 2 years ago. The Phoenix Plaza has risen from its ashes; Woolworths has risen from the Coles. I now declare that Woolworths Family Centre in Liverpool is open again.


10 September 1974
No one in public life can judge a fellow politician - let alone a fellow-leader  - with absolute detachment, the man is inseparable from the principles he espouses and the causes he works for; as such he is judged and remembered. My own view of Norman Kirk must therefore be coloured by the remarkable kinship of our political ideas, by the identity of our aims and purposes, and even by the extraordinary accident of history that brought us both to the leadership of our parties after the elections of 1966 and to office as prime ministers within a week of each other in the elections in 1972, in the circumstances we were inevitably colleagues. That in itself would not have made us friends; but friends we were indeed,
So I speak today with a true sense of personal grief, i share the sorrow we feel for the passing of a man; a man i knew well, a man i admired without reserve, a man whose human qualities matched the breadth and nobility of his public life, in no country save his own has his death been felt more keenly than here in Australia, he spoke not only for New Zealand but for his region, he spoke with a unique clarity and commitment for the emerging community of pacific nations, he spoke for small and middle powers everywhere. He worked at home, and his voice was heard abroad, in defence of the rights of small nations and for the welfare and dignity of the common man,
He fought for those causes with a rare vigour and passion, with attitudes shaped by the nature of his country and by the character of his early life, as the leader of a small power, he understood the anxieties and aspirations of small, independent nations, and with his background he understood and clearly felt the needs and feelings of ordinary people.  Few men i have known believed more deeply in the essential goodness of the ordinary man. That belief was intuitive, not learned; instinctive, not reasoned; it sprang from his own essential goodness, from an openness of mind and a largeness of heart, from an innate dignity and a personal experience of hardship that brought him close to his people and identified him, in rare fashion, with the universal struggle of humanity.
He had the great good fortune to lead one of the few secure parliamentary governments in the western world, indeed, as a unitary state with a unicameral legislature, a strong two-party system and an equal franchise, New Zealand is perhaps the model of a parliamentary democracy. Norman Kirk staunchly defended those institutions, and in these testing and uncertain times for democracy, the world can ill afford to lose a man of his stature, a leader who spoke with such confidence and authority for his country and all it represented, and for the causes of humanity and peace,
Not since the death of Harold Holt have Australians felt more keenly and personally the passing of a political leader, not since the death of President Kennedy have we sensed more acutely the tragedy of a career cut short. One could say justly of Kennedy that he had too little time to prove what he could do, that cannot be said of Norman Kirk, certainly he had too little time; but in the 21 months that he led his country he gave ample proof of his achievements.  Those achievements, i believe, will prove to be great and enduring,
When I first went to New Zealand to meet him at the beginning of last year he had been in office for barely two months, he had begun the great task of framing a new and independent foreign policy for his country and strengthening the welfare and social security of a people already renowned for their traditions of justice and equality. His beliefs were characteristically simple and uncompromising. He had a singular abhorrence of any form of racial discrimination. He loathed militarism. He loved justice. He loved his country. He wanted New Zealand's foreign policy to express her national ideals as well as to reflect her national interests, he withdrew New Zealand's forces from Vietnam, he recognised China, he realigned his country's voice behind the United Nations in matters of race and anti-colonialism, indeed so many of his early actions and decisions had their parallels in Australia that i fear i may be misconstrued if i recount them now. I simply say that in everything he did he had Australia's full support and my own unstinting admiration.
His approach to foreign policy was based on a principle which he proclaimed in these words soon after his government was elected: " we believe in the individual human worth and dignity of every man, woman and child, regardless of race or colour... Every action a people takes in international affairs is an announcement of the kind of people they really are, we know that in their daily lives New Zealanders are decent, humane people, my aim will be to ensure that New Zealand's actions abroad are in character."
His own actions, his whole personality, were equally in character. And nowhere was that personality blunt, forthright, courageous, humane displayed more strikingly than in his opposition to nuclear tests in the Pacific. His opposition to those tests was an example to the world and an inspiration to all who supported him. It made him the natural and respected spokesman for the pacific island states, all of them small, some of them former dependancies of New Zealand. In April last year we were both in Western Samoa for a meeting of the Pacific Forum. He enjoyed immense and deserved stature among the pacific leaders.  At times during breaks in the proceedings I talked with him on the breach at APIA, and was never more conscious of the kinship he felt with the pacific itself, with that vast and beautiful environment he sought to protect, and with the aspirations of the people who inhabit its shores and lovely islands,
We met on three other occasions during his term of office in Christchurch, in Ottawa, in Canberra. He lasted visited this country in November to open the chancery of the New Zealand High Commission, which ranks among the most elegant new buildings in this city. On each occasion I sensed a deepening and strengthening of the relations between our countries, a greater awareness of our shared purpose and understanding. It is a commonplace  - but no less true for being so - that no two nations in the world have a relationship of such trust and intimacy as Australia and New Zealand. Our names are linked in treaties and agreements. Our histories and origins have much in common. There has often been a striking synchronisation in the political character of our governments. Those of us who believe in democratic socialism, who have worked and fought for it, and who rejoiced at Norman Kirk's victory in 1972, saw in the events of that year the beginnings of an even deeper and more lasting partnership. It was, after all and i hope i will be forgiven a note of partisanship under Labor governments in both our countries that the Australian-New Zealand agreement - the ANZAC Pact  - was signed in 1944. Norman Kirk worked tirelessly to promote the spirit of that agreement. He saw in it an opportunity to develop in peace a relationship born and tested in war.
For all his attainments he was a man singularly without conceit, without pretence, above all without bitterness or recrimination. A shrewd judge, certainly; an able and gifted politician with the essential toughness required of him: yet in his true self a man of vision, guided by genuine ideals and a yearning for a better world. I never knew him to be petty or cynical, he had a clarity of mind, a singleness of purpose, and behind his bluff and candid demeanour, a natural warmth and charm He served his party for 25 years and despite indifferent health and the lack of a formal education succeeded in transforming and modernising its electoral appeal. I have no doubt that his total dedication to the tasks in hand and his relentless capacity for work helped shorten his lif. He died in the service of his people; and their sympathy and that of his friends will go out to his family, as their goodwill will flow to his successor, he leaves a country richer and prouder for his leadership,
Politicians are not the best judges of their own achievements. A man of Norman Kirk's essential humility was not one to dwell at inordinate length on the importance of his work or his place in his country's history. He left us, however, in no doubt about his aims or philosophy, they were expressed with unmistakable clarity and consistency in his speeches and writings, I leave you with two examples, "the Welfare State", he once wrote, " is the thousands of young people in our high schools, the young men and women in technical institutes and universities…for the family it has meant better homes, better health, better and more secure jobs, greater security. For those who, due to frailty, age, illness or disability, are no longer able to work, it should mean adequate provision and freedom from anxiety” And again, in a speech he gave soon after his party's victory in 1972, he said: "New Zealanders have built up a society and a way of life that is unsurpassed for decency and humanity. It could be even better, and we hope to secure co-operation in policies that will make it so, on such a basis we are justified in standing up in the world for what we believe, without excessive pride or undue modesty”.
Norman Kirk had neither excessive pride nor undue modesty. He stood up for what he believed. He spoke his mind. He never flinched from his principles or from the self-imposed standards which bound him to a public life of rigorous honour and exemplary service. He was a great leader. He was a good man.


11 September 1974
Mr Russett, Consuls General for Britain and Japan, my colleagues the Mayor of Penrith, Mr. Luchetti MP,  Mr. Mulock,  MLA Mr. Makino,  Mr. Montgomery, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It gives me very great pleasure indeed to he in this " studio", and I know that not only those on the platform but everybody in the audience will be on their very best behaviour because we are all in LIVING COLOUR, glorious technicolour, on the best and latest television sets available in the world.
It gives me very great pleasure indeed to be at this function with you. One of the first things I did after becoming Prime Minister was, early in the piece, when I was Prime Minister and minister for 12 other departments as well, was to ask the Tariff Board to put into force the p conditions under which colour television sets should be made in Australia was an early and striking opportunity to demonstrate that my government wanted to open up the processes by which decisions of this character were made.
 I'm delighted now to see the product, to see it being produced so well and so early. There is no doubt that but for that early, intensive, rapid enquiry by the Tariff Board ( now the Industries Assistance Commission), we D mightn't have had such good colour television sets in Australia as are now being made at Penrith, and it is certain that the public wouldn't have got such cheap ones.
The infusion of more colour in production and marketing has been a " god-send'" for the Australian electronic industry. The industry was over-protected and arrangements were in hand to see that the existing companies would have the whole field for themselves. Here today, we can see that two of the greatest, most experienced enterprises in the world have combined to produce, in Australia, good sets. They will be available in good time for the introduction of colour television in Australia, and we can be  certainly assured that companies that have had sane greater part to play in Britain, in Japan will produce good sets, and the heads of these enterprises assure me that the products of this factory will be as good as the products of any factory in which they participate anywhere in the world there couldn't be any greater assurance of quality than that.
I am very glad indeed that one of the first steps I took as Prime Minister was to see that we would get as good sets as we are now getting and as cheap sets as we will now be getting.
I also welcome the opportunity to say in the company of this great gathering of people who are involved in all aspects of the electronic industry: design, production, marketing, servicing and of course those who make the programmes too, that I welcome the opportunity to refute some of the alarmist talk that sometimes goes on, including in the electronics industry, because I regret to say that some-hitherto overprotected industries sometimes monopolised by overseas companies, very often too in collusion with trade unions, have raised the alarm of unemployment in this industry. It is absolute nonsense. There will b-e no reduction of employment in the electronics industry in Australia. one very simple reason is that it takes two. or three times as many men and women to produce colour television sets as it does to produce an equivalent number of black-and-white television sets.
So we ' re getting the good product here as we can see in Penrith today. So the industry in a more contemporary, competitive form is going to be prosperous. There will be a very great number of people employed in making and in designing and servicing these sets and producing these programmes who will benefit.
But above all, the public will benefit. And that's why all of us in each of our callings is able to provide because the public is satisfied with it.
There is one other matter which I should mention a feature of government policy in this field, and that is that earlier this year we had to face the fact that the patent rights controlling the PAL - these initials are always  very confusing I - f I talk about National, of course people in the National Alliance may think I'm raising some political issue; if I say PAL sane people may think this is sae mutation of ALP. I assure you if I use Words like National or PAL I am doing so in a completely dispassionate bi-partisan, multi-partisan sense.
Well, earlier this year, we found that these patent rights were held by AEG Telefunken and under the arrangements then pertaining, imports from Japan of sets under 1.8" couldn't cone to Australia before March, 1977 another 3 years before could get them that is colour T. V. would be here for 2 years before 18" screens would he available from the best source. Now this would have unreasonably restricted the consumer's choic6. As a result of negotiations with AEG Telefunken and with AWA my government has ensured that sufficient small sets will be available in Australia to meet the estimated demand from the outset of colour T. V.
I sometimes have misgivings about the small sets, I usually find that I require a broad screen and some people say that my wife and I both require a broad screen. It's a great medium for the family, television, but particularly for our family.
And I also of course, on this occasion in this week couldn't forbear to pay tribute to the insight or rather the farsightedness of the most progressive commercial station in N. S. W. for seeing that the whole team regularly appeared! The only difficulty in our family is that w have to see that the programmes in which we appear don't compete, so we have to appear at different times on Channel 2 and Channel 10. we have to keep our Channels right in T. V. And in our family we keep a good public balance in this respect. Just as I have to give equal time to Bill Snedden whenever I speak, my wife has to give equal time to me.
I always watch the polls. I never know whether they're referring to my government's stocks or my wife's ratings but I watch the polls in these respects.
 But to come back to the subject here, we are determined, as a government to see that people in Australia will have the best T. V. possible. The programmes, the reception, the servicing, the consumer, the producer, the performer albeit rain or hail or " Frost", T. V. will be first-rate in Australia. Now, we will be seeing ourselves, I don't know what channels will be showing it later on, but in a few months, on the products of this factory, people in a very great area of Australia, will be able to see colour T. V. as most  comparable countries have been able to see colour T. V. for some time~ past. And we can be sure, that the wait has been worthwhile, because we-will now, in Australia, from~ a combination of Australia's greatest overseas customers, Japan and Britain, with the co-operation they've shown in this case, with the opportunities they've given to men and women in this country, we will now be able to see colour television in Australia on sets which will be as good as those to be found anywhere in the world. I have very great pleasure in declaring the Rank-NEC factory open.
 



11 SEPTEMBER 1974
SPEECH BY-THE PRIME MINISTER
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
INAUGURAL MEETING OF THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE, CANBERRA
ONE OF THE REGULAR AND OFTEN UNNOTICED
ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS IS ITS DESIGNATION
OF INTERNATIONAL YEARS FOR THE PURPOSE OF DRAWING
ATTENTION TO MATTERS OF HUMAN SIGNIFICANCE. ' FOR
INSTANCE IN THE PAST DECADE THERE HAVE BEEN
PROCLAIMED SUCH YEARS AS
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION YEAR ( 1965)
INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR HUMAN RIGHTS ( 1968)
INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION YEAR ( 1970)
INTERNATIONAL YEAR TO COMBAT RACISM AND
RAC. IAL DISCRIMINATI. ON ( 1971)
WORLD POPULATION YEAR ( 1973)
* IN THE PAST, IN AUSTRALIA, THESE YEARS HAVE
BEEN CELEBRATED WITHIN THE COMMUNITY THROUGH THE ACTIVITIES
OF VARIOUS ORGANISATIONS, BUT RARELY HAVE GOVERNMENTS
TAKEN THESE YEARS SERIOUSLY ENOUG-H TO PLAN FAR-REACHING
AND IMAGINATIVE PROGRAMS AIMED AT ACHIEVING THE OBJECTIVES
OF THE YEAR. My GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT THERt IS
MUCH MORE THAT CAN BE DONE, AT A NATIONAL LEVEL, TO
ASSIST AND CO-ORDINATE THE CELEBRATION OF THESE
YEARS$ / 2 
-2-
THE STRUGGLE FOR UNIVERSAL HUAN RIGHTS
IS A PROTRACTED AND PERHAPS AN UNENDING STRUGGLE.
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR IS CONSIDERED TO BE
ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT IN THAT THE GOVERNMENT. IS
DETERMINED THAT ITS ACTIONS AND PHILOSOPHIES
ADOPTED IN THE INTERNATIONAL FORUM BE MATCHED WITH
THOSE PURSUED AT HOME. IN THE UNITED NATIONS,
AUSTRALIA IS BECOMING KNOWN AS AN OUTSPOKEN CONTENDER
FOR BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS. WE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WE HAVE
A CONTINUING OBLIGATION TO DO ALL IN OUR POWER TO
-PROMOTE RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
To MY MIND, THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF
HUMAN RIGHTS IS ONE OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT AND
ENLIGHTENED ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS, AND
IT IS FROM THIS FUNDAMENTAL COMMITMENT TO THE DIGNITY
OF PEOPLE THAT 1975 WAS UNANIMOUSLY PROCLAIMED ON
18 DECEMBER 1972 BY THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
TO BE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR,
IT IS WORTH CONSIDERING THE FACT THAT IT
WAS THOUGHT NECESSARY TO NOMINATE A YEAR FOR ALL
NATIONS TO MAKE A CONCENTRATED EFFORT TOWARDS ENSURING
THAT WOMEN ENJOY THE DIGNITY OF BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS, / 3 
-3-
THAT THEY AKt INTEGRATED INTO SOCIETY AND THAT
THERE IS A RECOGNITION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THEIR
CONTRIBUTION TO SOCIETY,
IT IS WORTH CONSIDERING THIS FACT BECAUSE
IT IS A SOBERING THOUGHT THAT WOMEN THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD HAVE TO BE GRANTED AN OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD.
THE FORMATION OF A NATIONAL ADVISORY
COMMITTEE, AND THIS ITS INAUGURAL MEETING, IS'AN
INSURANCE THAT AUSTRALIA WILL FACE THE RESPONSIBILITY
* THAT THIS YEAR PLACES UPON US.
IT IS MY HOPE THAT YOU WILL BE ABLE TO
MARSHALL, CO-ORDINATE AND ENCOURAGE THE DEDICATION,
ENERGY AND ENTHUSIASM OF ORGANISATIONS AND WOMEN
WITHIN THE COMMUNITY, AND THAT IN ADDITION YOU WILL
PROVIDE A NATIONAL DIRECTION TO THIS ACTIVITY SO THAT
1975 IS NOT ONLY A YEAR OF SIGNIFICANCE IN ITSELF
BUT THAT IT WILL HAVE MADE A LASTING CONTRIBUTION
TOWARDS REDUCING THE PREJUDICES AND LACK OF OPPORTUNITY
FROM WHICH WOMEN SUFFER. IT IS ALSO MY HOPE THAT THIS
YEAR WILL ENSURE A LASTING RECOGNITION OF THE GREAT
CONTRIBUTION THAT WOMEN HAVE MADE, AND CONTINUE TO
MAKE, TO AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY, S./ 14 
GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION CAN ONLY ACHIEVE SO
MUCH AND I SHALL NOT PRETEND TO YOU THAT ANY GOVERNMENT
CAN ACHIEVE IMMEDIATELY FOR AUSTRALIAN WOMEN THE REVOLUTION
REQUIRED TO ALLOW THEM TO DEVELOP FULLY AS INDIVIDUALS,
FOR INSTANCE IT MUST BE SAID THAT, EVEN IF
WE WERE TO REMOVE ALL THE INEQUALITIES OF OPPORTUNITY
AND OF STATUS, IT STILL WOULD NOT BE ENOUGH, WE HAVE
TO ATTACK THE SOCIAL INEQUALITIES, THE HIDDEN AND
USUALLY UNARTICULATED ASSUMPTIONS WHICH AFFECT WOMEN
NOT ONLY IN EMPLOYMENT BUT IN THE WHOLE RANGE OF THEIR
OPPORTUNITIES IN LIFE,
THIS IS NOT JUST A MATTER FOR GOVERNMENTS
AND FOR ACTION BY GOVERNMENTS IT IS A MATTER OF
CHANGING COMMUNITY ATTITUDES AND UPROOTING COMMUNITY
PREJUDICES, AND INSOFAR AS THIS REQUIRES A RE-EDUCATION
OF THE COMMUNITY THEN CLEARLY GOVERNMENTS ALONE CANNOT
BE EXPECTED TO DO THE WHOLE JOB, YOU ARE PROBABLY AWARE
OF WHAT WE HAVE DONE, ONE OF THE PURPOSES OF THE
HUMAN RIGHTS BILL WAS TO PERMIT AUSTRALIA TO RATIFY
THE CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN, WHICH
WAS ADOPTED BY THE UNITED NATIONS IN 1952 AND CAME
INTO FORCE IN JULY 1954, AUSTRALIA IS NOT A PARTY TO
THE CONVENTION ON THE POLITICAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN AS
THERE IS STILL LEGISLATION IN TWO STATES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA 
AND TASMANIA, THAT DOES NOT YET FULLY CONFORM WITH
THE REQUIREMENTS OF THAT CONVENTION, THIS CONVENTION
PROVIDES THAT WOMEN SHALL BE ENTITLED TO HOLD PUBLIC
OFFICE AT AUSTRALIAN AND STATE LEVEL ON EQUAL TERMS
WITH MEN, WITHOUT ANY DISCRIMINATION, ACTION HAS
ALREADY BEEN TAKEN TO AMEND AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION
RELATING TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE TO REMOVE PROVISIONS
THAT OFFEND AGAINST THIS CONVENTION, -IT ISEXPECTED
THAT AUSTRALIA WILL RATIFY OR ACCEDE TO THAT CONVENTION
AFTER THESE DEFECTS HAVE BEEN OVERCOME, EITHER AS A
RESULT OF THE PROPOSED HUMAN RIGHTS ACT OR BY THE
ENACTMENT OF SPECIFIC LEGISLATION ON THE SUBJECT,
MY GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADYfESTABLISHED
A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION, OTHER ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
IN THE AREA OF WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT INCLUDE:
SUCCESSFUL INTERVENTION IN DECEMBER 1972
IN PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE AUSTRALIAN
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
TO HAVE ESTABLISHED THE. PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL
PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE, CONSULTATIONS
WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE LED TO MOST
STATES AGREEING TO THIS PRINCIPLE, 
-6-
THE PROVISION OF TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR
WOMEN WISHING TO ENTER OR RE-ENTER THE
LABOUR FORCE AFTER A PERIOD OF DOMESTIC
RESPONSIBILITY,
THIS COMING YEAR WILL ALSO SEE THE BEGINNING
OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOVERNMENT'S NEW PROGRAM
FOR THE CARE AND EDUCATION OF YOUNG CHILDREN, IN NO
OTHER COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS SUCH AN AMBITIOUS PROGRAM
BEEN ATTEMPTED, THIS PROGRAM RECOGNISES THE NEED FOR
EDUCATIONAL, HEALTH AND WELFARE COMPONENTS IN CHILD
CARE; IT RECOGNISES THE NEED FOR THESE SAME SERVICES
FOR CHILDREN WHETHER THEY BE LOOKED AFTER AT HOME OR
ELSEWHERE, IT WILL BREAK DOWN THE TRADITIONAL
DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN OCCASIONAL CARE AND REGULAR CARE,
BETWEEN PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION AND CHILD MINDING, ALL
CHILDREN WHETHER THEY BE LOOKED AFTER AT HOME OR
ELSEWHERE WILL HAVE ACCESS TO LOCAL CENTRES DESIGNED
TO TAKE CARE OF THEIR EDUCATIONAL, HEALTH, PSYCHOLOGICAL
AND OTHER NEEDS, THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS PROGRAM
WILL PLACE AUSTRALIA AMONGST THOSE COUNTRIES MOST
GENUINELY CONCERNED WITH WELFARE OF THE YOUNG.
FURTHERMORE, THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION HAS
ESTABLISHED A COMMITTEE TO LOOK INTO THE RELATION
BETWEEN SOCIAL CHANGE AND THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN
AND GIRLS, RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THIS COMMITTEE .17 
-7-
' WILL BE INCLUDED IN THE REPORT TO BE PRESENTED TO
PARLIAMENT IN THE COURSE OF NEXT YEAR, IT3 TERMS OF
REFERENCE ARE FAR-REACHING AND ITS TASK A DIFFICULT ONE,
FOR NOT ONLY MUST IT PINPOINT THOSE AREAS OF EDUCATION
WITHIN WHICH WOMEN ARE DISADVANTAGED, BUT IT MUST ALSO
MAKE SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE ACTION,
MANY OTHER GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS HAVE
PROGRAMS PLANNED FOR THE COMING YEAR,
IN THE FIELD OF WOMEN'S HEALTH, THE FIRST,
AND BASIC, INIATIVE TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LEICHHARDT WOMEN'S COMMUNITY
HEALTH CENTRE IN SYDNEY, THE AIM OF THI. S CENTRE IS TO
S MEET A NEED EXPRESSED BY WOMEN FOR A HEALTH SERVICE
STAFFED BY WOMEN DIRECTED SOLELY TOWARDS THE SPECIAL
HEALTH NEEDS OF WOMEN, THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT INIATIVE
OF A COMPLETELY NEW DIMENSION DERIVING DIRECTLY FROM
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BROAD POLICY PERSPECTIVES
AND THE COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM WILL BE ACTIVELY
DEVELOPED TO GIVE IT PRIORITY,
GREATER PARTICIPATION BY, WOMEN AT ALL LEVELS
OF HEALTH CARE PLANNING, DELIVERY AND ADMINISTRATION
IS BEING ACTIVELY PROMOTED AND THIS POLICY IS PROVIDING
WOMEN WITH INCREASING OPPORTUNITIES OF INFLUENCING THE
DIRECTION WHICH HEALTH CARE IS TAKING IN THE COMMUNITY, / 8 
-8-
IN THE FIELD OF ABORIGINAL HEALTH, ABORIGINAL
WOMEN ARE BEING INVOLVED TO AN INCREASING DEGREE IN THE
DELIVERY OF HEALTH CARE TO THEIR OWN PEOPLE.
THE INITIATIVE OF MY GOVERNMENT WHICH MAY
HAVE THE MOST FAR-REACHING CONSEQUENCES IS THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A ROYAL COMMISSION INTO HUMAN
RELATIONSHIPS. IT IS THE TASK OF THIS COMMISSION TO
INVESTIGATE THE STRESSES THAT SOCIETY PLACES UPON
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PEOPLE, IN WHAT WAYS INADEQUATE
HOUSING, INSUFFICIENT MONEY, TOO MANY OR TOO FEW
CHILDREN, THE AVAILABILITY OR OTHERWISE OF CONTRACEPTIVE
COUNSELLING AND THE ADEQUACY OF MEDICAL CARE AFFECT
PEOPLE AND THEIR RELATIONSHIPS. THIS COMMISSION HAS
BEEN ASKED TO PRESENT REGULAR INTERIM REPORTS AND HENCE
WILL ALSO CONTRIBUTE TO THE SUCCESS OF THE COMING YEAR.
WE MUST HOWEVER ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE INEQUALITY
OF WOMEN'S POSITION IN SOCIETY IS DEEPLY EMBEDDED NOT
JUST IN THE INSTITUTIONS BUT ALSO IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF
THE SOCIETY. IN THIS RESPECT THOSE WOMEN'S ORGANISATIONS
ARE CORRECT WHICH SAY THAT THE FIRST AND FUNDAMENTAL STEP
TOWARDS FREEDOM IS AWARENESS BY WOMEN THEMSELVES OF THEIR
REAL INEQUALITY, OF THE EXTENT OF THEIR SOCIAL, POLITICAL,
ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL DISCRIMINATION AND DEPRIVATION. ,/ 9
i-
-9-
I HAVE MENTIONED THE GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY
THAT THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE HAS FOR DEVELOPING
THEMES AND PROGRAMS FOR THE YEAR WHICH WILL BE OF BENEFIT
TO ALL WOMEN IN AUSTRALIA, WHATEVER THEIR EDUCATION, THEIR
CULTURAL BACKGROUND, THEIR ECONOMIC STATUS, THEIR
OCCUPATION, THEIR BELIEFS OR THEIR WAY OF LIFE. IN SO
DOING YOU ALSO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO TACKLE THIS
BASIC PROBLEM OF EMBEDDED ATTITUDES NOT ONLY BY
ENCOURAGING THE GROWTH OF COMMUNITY ACTIVITY IN AREAS
AFFECTING WOMEN BUT ALSO BY GIVING A SIGNIFICANT BOOST
' TO THE LEVEL OF AWARENESS AMONGST WOMEN AND MEN OF THE
EXTENT OF THESE PROBLEMS.
IT IS FOR THIS REASON AND BECA'USE OF OUR
COMMITMENT TO CHANGE IN THIS AREA THAT MY GOVERNMENT
IS DETERMINED THAT SUFFICIENT TIME AND FUNDS BE
AVAILABLE TO ACHIEVE THESE ENDS AND IT IS ALSO FOR
THIS REASON THAT MUCH TIME AND THOUGHT WENT INTO THE
MEMBERSHIP OF THE NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE. WE
WANTED, AND WE HAVE, A GROUP OF PEOPLE WHOSE UNIQUE
EXPERTISE AND EXPERIENCE IS DEEPLY GROUNDED IN THEIR
UNDERSTANDING OF AND DEMONSTRATED COMMITMENT TO?. AUSTRALIAN
WOMEN, THEIR PRESENT AND THEIR FUTURE. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON.* E. G. WHITLAM,
AT PENRITH CIVIC RECEPTION*.-
11 SEPTEMBER 1974
THE PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
HAVE NATIONAL IMPLICATIONS QUITE DISTINCT FROM THE-IR
RELEVANCE TO PARTICULAR LOCALITIES. WHEN THE
INSTITUTE OF MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION WAS ESTABLISHED
' IN 1952 ON A FEDERAL BASIS IT REALISED THAT " WHILE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS LOCAL AND, IN FACT, DERIVES ITS
FUNCTIONS'FROM EACH RESPECTIVE STATE, THE DEVELOPMENT
, AND STRENGTH OF-IT IS A MATTER OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE
AND OF NATIONAL CONCERN. 1
IT WAS TWENTY YEARS BEFORE A NATIONAL
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS PREPARED TO TAKE A SIMILAR
ATTITUDE. ONLY SINCE LABOR WAS ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972
HAS ANY ATTEMPT BEEN MADE TO GIVE PRACTICAL HELP TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN MEETING THE INCREASING DEMANDS
MADE UPON IT. ./ 2 
-2-
Nr KNOWS BETTER THAN THOSE INVOLVED IN
LOCAL GOVER'. MENT THE LONG YEARS OF NEGLECT AND
INDIFFERENCE FROM WHICH IT HAS SUFFERED AND THE
ATMOSPHERE OF PERPETUAL FINANCIAL CRISIS THAT
SURROUNDS IT FOR GENERATIONS. I HAVE OFTEN MARVELLED
AT THE DEDICATION AND FORTITUDE OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO
HAVE CONTINUED TO SERVE LOCAL'GOVERNMENT IN THE FACE
OF SUCH ODDS. NOW THE PROSPECTS ARE CHANGING.
THE RECENT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA'-WITH THE LION'S SHARE COMING TO NEW SOUTH
WALES ARE THE BEGINNING OF THE END OF THE INEQUALITY
BETWEEN ' COUNCILS AND BETWEEN REGIONS THAT HAS BEDEVILLED
' THE GROWTH OF RESPONSIBLE AND RESPONSIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
IN AUSTRALIA. ALL MY GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES HAVE BEEN DIRECTED
TO ELEVATING THE STATUS AND IMPORTANCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM, AND ESPECIALLY HAVE THEY BEEN
DIRECTED TO GIVING LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS TO THE RESOURCES
TO DO ITS JOB. WE SHOULD NEVER FORGET THE DISGRACEFUL
WAY LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN NEGLECTED AND DOWNGRADED SINCE
THE VERY BEGINNINGS OF OUR FEDERATION, .1/ 3 
THE ø' ZBTS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE MULTIPLIED MORE THAN TWELVE TIMES SINCE
THE WAR, STATE DEBTS SIX TIMES, UP TO LAST YEAR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES WERE BORROWING MORE EACH YEAR THAN
THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THEIR OUTSTANDING DEBT OVER 20 YEARS
OR SO AGO, AT THE SAME TIME THERE HAVE BEEN ACCELERATING
DEMANDS QUITE NATURAL AND PREDICTABLE DEMANDS ON
LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES, YET NOTHING WAS DONE TO
REDRESS THESE DEFICIENCIES; NOTHING WAS DONE TO CORRECT
A SYSTEM THAT ALLOWED THEM TO WORSEN YEAR BY YEAR.
THERE WAS NO SHORTAGE OF EVIDENCE ABOUT THE NEEDS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, THE BARNETT REPORT ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT
" AREAS AND ADMINISTRATION IN NEW SOUTH WALES REPORTED LAST
YEAR THAT IN THE VIEW OF MOST SHIRE COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES " THEIR AREAS COULD NOT SURVIVE WITHOUT A CONTINUANCE
, OF LARGE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND, WITHOUT EXCEPTION,
COUNCILS BELIEVED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT
IN FINANCING LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS ESSENTIAL."
THE RECENT GRANTS COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS REFLECT
MY GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENT TO SUCH NECESSARY ASSISTANCE TO
THAT PART OF GOVERNMENT WHICH IS CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE,
LET ME REMIND YOU OF HOW THOSE GRANTS CAME ABOUT, ,/ 4 
WYf"! N SIX MONTHS OF LABOR'S ELECTION TO
GOVERNMENT ri DECEMBER 19721 THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
PASSED A NEW GRANTS COMMISSION ACT AUTHORISING THAT
BODY TO INQUIRE INTO APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE BY
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. ANY
ASSISTANCE RECOMMENDED BY THE COMMISSION AND APPROVED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO BE PAID TO THE STATES
UNDER SECTION 96 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON CONDITION THAT
IT BE PASSED ON TO THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS CONCERNED$
ADDITIONAL MEMBERS WERE APPOINTED TO THE COMMISSION AND
ITS STAFF WAS EXPANDED TO ENABLE IT TO DEAL WITH THIS
LARGE NEW RESPONSIBILITY. FROM NOW ON, THE COMMIS. SION
IS TO PLAY THE SAME ROLE IN REDUCING INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
REGIONS AS IT HAS BETWEEN THE STATES SINCE 19331
LAST MONTH MY GOVERNMENT APPROVED ALLOCATIONS. OF
$ 56,345,000 TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA. OF THISI $ 21,359,1000 CAME TO* NEW SOUTH WALES.
WE ACCEPTED THE GRANTS COMMISSION'S RECOMMENDATION THAT NO
CONDITIONS BE ATTACHED TO THE WAY IN WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES SPEND THESE, THEIR FIRST ALLOCATIONS UNDER THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT'S NEW SCHEME TO HELP REDUCE
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. THE
SYDNEY WESTERN REGION WILL RECEIVE A TOTAL OF $ 3,380,0004,
OF WHICH PENRITH CITY COUNCIL IS TO GET $ 330,000.' 111/ 5 
A .0ON AS THE GRANTS COMMISSION REPORT WAS
TABLED IN ' E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, I SENT
TELEGRAMS TO ALL COUNCILS INFORMING THEM CF THEIR
INDIVIDUAL GRANTS, I TRUST THAT THE MAJORITY OF
COUNCILS DERIVED AS MUCH PLEASURE FROM RECEIVING THEM
AS I HAD IN SENDING THEM, IT IS ALWAYS EXHILARATING TO
BE ABLE TO DELIVER THE GOODS, I TRUST YOU WILL ENJOY
THE PROCESS OF TYING UP THE PACKAGE AS YOUR COUNCIL
DELIBERATIONS DICTATE, SINCE WE ATTACHED NO STRINGS
TO OUR LONG-AWAITED PRESENT,
OUR SECOND GREAT INITIATIVE LAST YEARWAS TO SEEK
A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LoAN COUNCIL,
OUR PURPOSE WAS, AND STILL IS, TO ADMIT REPRESENTATIVES OF
ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS FROM EACH STATE AND ENABLE THE
., COMMONWEALTH, ON REQUEST, TO RAISE APPROVED LOANS RAISED
BY THE COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATES, I NEED HARDLY
REMIND YOU OF THE RESULTS OF* THAT SPECIAL PREMIERS CONFERENCE
IN OCTOBER LAST YEAR WHICH TURNED OUR PROPOSALS DOWN,
WHEN THE PREMIERS REJECTED THESE PROPOSALS TO BALANCE THE
FUNCTIONS AND FINANCES OF THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENT
TO ENSURE ADEQUATE SERVICES AND DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES,
WE HAD NO ALTERNATIVE BUT TO PROCEED WITH A REFERENDUM, 
-6-
THAT REFERENDUM WAS CARRIED IN NEW SOUTH WALES,
LARGELY BEC'JASE SO MANY LOCAL GOVERNMENT PEOPLE SUPPORTED
IT IN THE FACE OF STRONG OPPOSITION FROM THE STATE
PREMIER AND THE FEDERAL OPPOSITION PARTIES WHO TRIED TO
SCARE THE PEOPLE AWAY FROM IT. I BELIEVE THAT YOU
SUPPORTED THAT REFERENDUM BECAUSE YOU REALISED WHERE
YOUR HOPE FOR SURVIVAL LAY, THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
SUPPORTED IT BECAUSE RESPONSIBLE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES
ENCOURAGED THEM TO DO SO.
WHAT OF THE FEAR OF A FEDERAL TAKEOVER OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT? IT IS A GHOST WHICH MUST BE LAID TO REST.
FOR MY PART I HAVE NO WISH TO SEE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECOME
AN APPENDAGE OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANY MORE THAN I
WANT IT TO REMAIN AN APPENDAGE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS.
BUT I DO WANT IT TO HAVE ADEQUATE AND REASONABLE ACCESS
TO THE NATION'S FINANCIAL RESOURCES. IT MUST BE ELEVATED TO
ITS PROPER PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY AND GIVEN THE MEANS
TO CARRY OUT ITS WORK FOR THE LASTING BENEFITS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS
SHOWN THE WAY. 



EMBARGO : 4.00 PN
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE A. L. P. REGIONAL COUNCIL TOWNSVILLE
SATURDAY 21ST SEPTEMBER, 1974
I take this opportunity here in his home city and
among the people he represents of congratulating Percy Tucker
as Leader of the Labor Party in Queensland. I have orked with
him for many years as a colleague and known him even longer as
a friend. The Labor Party in Queensland has a fine leader, a
respected leader, a leader who will carry it to victory in this
State and work with the Australian Labor Government for the
achievement of our common goals.
Four days ago my colleague the Treasurer brought down
the second Labor Budget in a quarter of a century. This is
my first opportunity to speak to a gathering of the party since
the Budget was presented. I welcome the chance to be with you
because the Budget gave all of us something to celebrate. We
have heard the expected outcry from the Opposition, the predictable
condemnation from the wealthy, the privileged, the richest
private schools, the stockbrokers, the speculators, the vested
interests. What are the facts? The Budget on Tuesday was the
most democratic and most radical in our history, the most
comprehensive expression of the Government's ambitions and the
party's philosophy that we have yet seen. It was a fair Budget,
a humane Budget, a confident Budget. It was a great Labor Budgeta
landmark in the party's struggle for humanity and justice.
You'll remember that for weeks and months beforehand
we had a welter of advice and speculation about what the Budget
should contain. Economists, academics, union leaders, politicians,
leader-writers the whole community was engaged in a quite
unprecedented debate on the future of the economy. And I welcomed
that debate.. For there was a very clear lesson to beldrawn from
the abundance of conjecture and advice. It proved there was no
obvious or conventional solution to our economic difficulties.
Imagine what would have happened if there had been a Liberal-
Country Party Budget on Tuesday night. There would have been no
room for doubt or speculation then. We all know what their Budget
would have done. How easy, how simple how savage that Budget
would have been! Back to Dranconian measures and conventional
remedies massive unemployment, bankrupt businesses, idle factories,
indiscriminate monetary restrictions. And-an end to our plans
for a fairer society and a brighter future for Australians.
Well,. that wasn't our method. Of course we could have
chosen the Liberal remedies, and I dare say if we had the Tory
pundits and commentators would now be applauding our responsibility.
But we weren't going to take it out on the weak, on the poor, on
the disadvantaged, on the children, on the Aborigines, on the
migrants, on the workers of this country. I have long held the view
that the Budget is not just an economic document but a declaration
of the Government's view of the kind of society we want and the
kind of people we are. That is what our Budget was about. Nothing
we have done has so clearly demonstrated, so clearly symbolised,
this Government's philosophy and concerns, its priorities and
aspirations. The choice was between Liberal remedies, discredited
Liberal remedies, with the abandonment of our program, or a
continuation of that program with a balanced and selective attack
on inflation in which the burdens will fall on those best able to 
-2-
bear them. We have framed a Budget which will raise the living
standards of the great majority of our people. We have framed
a Budget that will let us carry on the fight against inflation
-through flexible, discriminating measures and on a . s sound
co-operation between government and unions, employeis ind
employees, and all sections of the community.
This wasn't one man's Budget or a victory for-one
set of ideas over everything else. The Budget was the product of
weeks of intensive discussion within Cabinet, with the Government's
economic advisers, with the representatives of employees and
industry. It represented the collective view of the Government,
the whole Labor team, and in a true sense the ideals and
aspirations of the whole party. Every Australian citizen is
assured of a fair deal, a fair share, a fair go from our Budget.
We have reduced taxation for employees on all but the highest
incomes. We have cut back on lurks and tax dodges. We have
made certain that those who live on rents and dividends and
capital gains contribute their fair share of taxation to the
revenue. We have made provision for those most in need the war
veterans, the families with handicapped children, the old, the
sick and the Aboriginals. And with all that, we have advanced
and augmented our great programs for hospitals, schools, roads
and new cities. It is the quality of these services that will
determine the true standa~ d of living of our people just as much
as the thickness of their pay packets.
In everything we have done we have kept faith with the
people, the people who twice elected. us to govern. We have laid
the foundation for true national co-operation in the fight against
inflation. That fight can now go forwat'with confidence. It
won't be a fight in which only the fittest survive. The fittest
will carry * the heaviest burden. So every employee, every trade
unionist, every producer knows that from now on the f-ight will
be waged by the whole community fairly and squarely. And I put
it to you that it is in the interests of employees and their
organisations to join that fight and safeguard the gains they
have won for themselves and their families. I am not going to
kid the workers of this country that the fight will be easy. I do
say that the fight will be fair. Our Budget has ensured that the
lowest paid worker will be especially protected from the consequences
of an anti-inflationary strategy. We have established the
essential conditions on which that strategy of restraint and
co-operation can work. I appeal to the whole Labor movement to give
it a chance to work. The rewards will be great. Employees and
workers have most to gain from eventual success.
One of the great aims of the Budget is to raise the
standard of essential community services not just the services
my Government provides, but those of the States. There has never
been a Government more generous to the States. Yet I don't suppose
there has been a Government more maligned and traduced by the
Premiers. Our increased grants to the States did not begin with
this Budget. They began with our first Budget last year and they
have been augmented in numerous offers of special assistance. Our
Budget on Tuesday provided massive increases-' in grants to the
States of all kinds. The States will receive the largest increase
in direct and special purpose grants ever made. They will receive
36 percent of the total outlays in this Budget. The Budget provide~ i
for a 32.4 percent increase in total expenditure and 39.5 percent
of that increase will be payments to the States. / 3 
-3-
That is the answer to the phony, neurotic accusations
of centralism we hear from the Premiers. Is it centralist for
our Budget to allow a greater increase in the outlay for the States
than for our outlays? Is it centralist to provide the States
. with record grants for roads, schools, hospitals, ii,,.-ities,
sewerage and the improvement of the cities? Is it cuerlralist
to approve grants of $ 56 million to the States for locdl government
bodies on the recommendation of the Grants Coinmissica? Of course
not. All we say is that when the taxpayers of the nation provide
money for the States on such a scale they should at least have
some say through their national government in how that money
is used. The whole centralist catchcry is threadbare and dishonest.
I suggest that for the people of Townsville the real centralism,
the really pernicious and arrogant centralism, is exercised
from Brisbane. Here you have a region rich in resources, a region
rich in potential, rich in confidence and pride. You are part
of a State equally rich and proud. My colleagues in the Australian
Government share your confidence; we share your aspirations.
We want this State and this region to develop and prosper. We
are determined you will do so. The tragedy is that the development
of Queensland and your region is being held back not by us,
but by the very State Government that professes most loudly its
faith in the future of your State and in need for development.
on issue after issue important plans for Queensland's
development have been blocked by Mr Bjelke-Petersen. Take our
plans for this city, for Townsville itself. One of the first
things I promised on behalf of a Labor Government promised in
my policy speech in 1972 was to make Townsville a regional
growth centre. Despite our representation8, despite our
* correspondence, despite our personal pleas these plans have been
stalled. By now the whole scheme for a greater, more prosperous
Townsville could be well advanced just as it is in Albury-Wodonga.
Instead it is a victim of Mr Bjelke-Petersen's prejudice and
suspicion. I don't ask him to like me or to like the Labor Party.
What he thinks of the Australian Government is his business.
What he does for Townsville is your business and Queensland's
business. The blunt truth is that Mr Bjelke-Petersen would rather
deny Townsville its limitless prospect for growth than swallow his
pride and work with a Labor Government. Yet here is a Premier, a
Country Party Premier, who professes his belief in rural development
and decentralisation. Where would Albury-Wodonga be today if the New South Wales
and Victorian GOVernnlents took the same short-sighted view? They
are not Labor Governments. There is little love lost between me
and Sir Robert Askin or Mr Hamer for that matte They are big
enough men to put the interests of their States before their
personal animosities. The result has been a genuine creative
partnership between the three Governments for the development of
Albury-Wodonga. Our Budget on Tuesday allocated $ 40 million for the
new city. A further $ 37.4 million has been provided for the
establishment of other growth centres at Monarto in South Australia,
Geelong in Victoria and Bathurst-orange in New South Wales. If it's
good enough for Sir Robert Askin and Mr Hamer,-why isn't it good
enough for Mr Bjelke-Petersen? 4 
Townsville cannot afford to see its progress hampered
by political rivalry. The north cannot afford it, Queensland cannot
afford it. Your city is firmly established as one of the great
regional capitals in Queensland and its future pr : e-ss is
unlimited. It has a major university, it is the centre of our
northern defence programs, the chosen site of a marine science
institute of international renown. With so much at stake, the
future of Townsville and its region, and indeed all northern
development, will depend on a healthy and productive
relationship between the State and national Governments. Townsville
has more to lose than any other city in Australia if politics is
allowed to cloud and disrupt the one aim we all want to achieve
the development of the north, with more industry, more job
opportunities, and improved facilities for present and future
generations of Australians.
If North Queenslanders have reason to complain about
government from the south they should direct their complaints to
Brisbane rather than Canberra. All our objectives for the State
and particularly for the north our plans to halt spiralling
land prices, to improve the quality of life, to make urban
development more equitable and efficient have been held up in
Brisbane. ' Our 1973/ 74 Budget allocated $ 2 million for land
acquisition and development works in Townsville, $ 1.2 million
for similar work in the Moreton region and $ 1.2 million for
Gladstone. It is incredible that none of these funds have been
spent simply because we cannot reach agreement with the
Queensland Premier.
So there is a real danger that Queensland's development
will fall behind. I instance our plans f6r Land Commissions.
* The Budget this year provides $ 24 million to South Australia for the
purchase of land. That land will be resold to home buyers at
fair and reasonable prices. The land price spiral in* South Australia
has been effectively brought under control. We are providing
$ 16 million to Victoria for a similar purpose. Even Sir Robert
Askin has agreed in principle to our Land Commission. Queensland
says NO. Or take our sewerage program. In 1973/ 74 Townsville
was eligible for assistance under the national sewerage scheme.
Mr Bjelke-Petersen wouldn't take the money. In 1574/ 75 we are
allocating $ 13 million to Queensland for sewerage works. Townsville's
share will be well over a quarter of a million.
The other States are getting on with the job. Why should
the people of Queensland put up with unsewered houses because of
Mr Bjelke-Petersen' s dislike of Canberra? This is an issue on which
the Premier must carry the can. And why should Queensland be
denied, an international airport at Townsville? Again I ask:
if it's good enough for the Liberal Premiers of New South Wales
and Victoria why isn't it good enough for the Country Party
Premier of Queensland?
The Premier clings to his obstinate ban on shipping
between Queensland ports. He prefers to hold back development and
decentralisation in the State rather than let an Australian
Government ship do the work. This is ideologidal prejudice of
the silliest, most self-defeating kind. Within 14 days of taking
office in December 1972 I offered the use of Australian National
Line ships for intra-State trade on the Queensland coast.
Mr Bjelke-Petersen said the matter would receive consideration.
I spoke to him about it in March last year. I wrote to him again
in April and June this year. My last letter brought no reply. 
Ineed hardly stress the importance of a regular
intra-State shipping service. It would provide an alternative means
of transport when the highways or railways are cut by floods.
It would provide a more rational and diversified transport system.
It would maximise the efficiency of the Townsville Harbour Board's
facilities for handling freight. There are some types of freight
that can only be carried by sea. We have seen the farcical
situation of foreign-owned ships engaged to carry bauxite from
Weipa to Gladstone because the Queensland Government refused to
let an Australian Government ship do the work. There are ships
plying between Queensland and the other States with space in their
holds for 1000 tons of intra-State cargo on every voyage. I am
afraid the Premier's intransigence finds little support from the
people of North Queensland. The North Queensland Chambers of
Commerce don'It agree with him. The Queensland Harbour Board
Association doesn't agree with him. The Townsville District
Development Bureau and the Townsville City Council don't agree
with him. Why should the people of Townsville agree with him?
We have put forward other measures to help Queensl and's
industrial development. For years I have been concerned at the
high cost of electricity in Queensland compared with other
eastern States. There are complex reasons for these higher costs
but the Australian Government wants to help reduce them. I wrote
to Mr Bjelke-Petersen on 5 June. I proposed that the Australian
Government, in conjunction with Queensland, undertake a study of
ways and means of increasing efficiency and reducing costs within
the Queensland power system. The Premier has not replied; his
department told us it was examining our offer.
I wrote to the Premier within weeks of the Government
assuming office and offered to assume responsibility for the
uneconomic ' State railway system. Railways impose a crippling
burden on State finances and distort their whole budget. We
waited a long time but eventually we got our answer. The
Queensland Government was not even prepared to discuss our proposal.
The fact is that no Government has treated Queensland
more generously, more openly, than mine. I read a remark by
Sir Gordon Chalk the other day that the Queensland Budget this
year would be " the best State Budget in Australia". I congratulate
the Treasurer of Queensland. I trust the people of Queensland
will remember that this * situation has been largely made possible
by the Australian Government' s grants. Let's hear no more about
us starving or strangling the States. It's claptrap! Total
revenue assistance to Queensland in 1970/ 71 to go back four
years was $ 223 million. The estimated total in the present
Budget is nearly double $ 434 million. Payments for general
purpose capital funds have increased in the same period from
$ 93 million to $ 145 million. Our assistance has increased over
a whole range of special purpose grants universities from
$ 7 million to $ 41 million; colleges of advanced education from
million to $ 24.5 million; Aboriginal advancement from
$ 216,000 to $ 2,085,000; community health from nothing to $ 2.9 million
/ 6 
How revealing to contrast the priorities of the
Queensland and Australian Labor Governments! What are! the issues
that occupy us, the matters that dominate our rftin(. I We could
be pardoned for thinking that nothing is more important to the
Queensland Premier than appointing a Queen of Queensland. Is that
really an issue in 1974? Do we want a Queen of New South Wales
and a Queen of Victoria as well? A Queen of Western Australia
and a Queen of Tasmania? Does Canada need a Queen of Ontario and
a Queen of Price Edward Island? Perhaps I am wrong. Perhaps
the most important issue in Mr Bjelke-Petersen's mind is the
Privy Council. He wants decisions made by judges appointed by
his own Government to be subject to veto by judges appointed by
the British Government. Is that a burning issue in 1974? We
know how much the Premier of Queensland relies on the courts. He
is still using the courts to fight our legislation, to challenge
the decisions of the joint sitting of the Australian Parliament,
to overturn the wishes of the Australian people who twice gave
their endorsement to the program of reform initiated by the
Australian Labor Party.
I have no personal animosity towards Mr Bjelke-Petersen. I just
wish he'd make up his mind what he wants for his State. We know
what he wants for the Country Party a mandate to govern with
percent of the vote, or preferably less. The fact is the
Queensland's electoral boundaries are flagrantly rigged in the
Country Party's favour. Its not just a little extra weighting
for the benefit of remote rural seats. It's a masterpiece of
malapportionment. In the 1972 State elections it took 12,849
votes to elect one Labor member. It to * ok 9,163 votes to elect
one Liberal member and 6,977 votes to elect one Country Party
member. Provincial cities like Townsville suffer as much as
Brisbane. ' The boundaries are blatantly designed to reduce
their representation. The average enrolment in a provincial
city electorate is 14,476. In the Western and Far Northern Zone
it is 8,153. In the Country Zone it is 10,779. Under any fair
system of boundaries the Townsville area would merit at least
one additional seat in the Queensland Parliament.
So apart from a gerrymander, what does Mr Bjelke-Petersen
want for Queensland? Does he want it to be part of Australia
or a private realm of his own? Does he want it to share in
the nation's progress or become a backwater? I wish he'd. shake
off his hangups and pettifogging obsessions about State rights
and centralism and the monarchy and the Privy Council and get
down to the business of government. I wish he'd forget his
persecution complex and realise that the Australian Government
is ready and willing to work with him for the good of Queensland.
I wish he'd spare us his tantrums and posturing and let us get
on with the job together. It is frankly not a pretty sight
to see a proud and important State held back by its own Government.
What we need is not a full-time Queen of Queensland but a fulltime
Premier of Queensland. Less vaudeville, less invective,
less vote-rigging more action, more enterprise, more co-operation.
/ 7 
-7-
In the 21 months since we came to office the
Australian Government has offered the States a new deal. We
have offered Queensland a new deal. The Budget we brought
down this week confirmed that offer. It opened the way to
a limitless future for this State and for all Australians
a future based on equity and justice. To achieve those goals
we ask nothing more, we need nothing more, than a reasonable
spirit of co-operation and goodwill. Let us get on with the
job of building a stronger and more prosperous Queensland
in a stronger and more prosperous nation. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH, SOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE, RAROTONGA,
26 SEPTEMBER 1974
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen: thank
you very much indeed for allowing me to say a few words to
you at your conference. This is my first visit to the Cook
Islands and I am making this visit because of the hospitality,
the very good personal relations which Sir Albert Henry has
been able to establish with so many people over the years at
various conferences. I have attended, as a member, the South
Pacific Forum. I did so shortly after becoming Prime Minister
in April last year. The conference was held in western Samoa,
and the conference was held a few months earlier than had
originally been arranged because there had been brand new governments
in New Zealand as well as in Australia in December 1972. On that
occasion, as a full member of a South Pacific body, I was able
to learn more closely than ever before many of the things which
concerned us jointly as well as individually. The South Pacific
Commission is the first of these bodies to be created it was
created under the Canberra Agreement named after Australia's
capital in 1947. It seems now very much an. archaic and fraternal
body. It was composed entirely of metropolitan powers. It became
clear for many years past that that was not enough to satisfy
the aspirations of the people of the South Pacific and thereupon
theSouth Pacific Conference emerged. It * was composed of all the
territories in the South Seas. Those who were independent, those
that were associated with metropolitan powers, but they were all
represented there. And eventually the South Pacific Conference
came to discuss matters of great substance, matters which concerned
all the people whatever their language, whatever their political
arrangements and now the position of the Commission and the
Conference has been very largely transposed. Now, I am happy
that last year my country was very anxious that the conference
should become even more significant and the Commission should
become a Commission of the Commonwealth. As I understand it my
country is not entitled to be a member of the conference except
in so far as it has responsibilities for Norfolk Island and still
for Papua New Guinea. By the time of the next South Pacific
Conference I would expect that Papua New Guinea, in international
terms, will be an independent country as, from Australia's point
of view, we are already happy to regard. But as head of government
in my country I am able to attend meetings of the South Pacific
Forum and I find it a very interesting and significant body.
At the conference, over the next few days, my Government
will be represented by Mr. Bill Morrison who was a member of the
Australian diplomatic service for about 20 years before he became
a minister in my government. As a member of the diplomatic service
he has served in Singapore and Malaysia and had responsibilities
on behalf of Australia in many programs thatAustralia was engaged
in in some parts of Malaysia. He therefore comes to this conference
with twenty years or more experience of international arrangements
and particularly in developing countries; countries developing
not only economically but politically. When I formed my government
I made him the last minister in charge of External Territories,
in effect Papua New Guinea. When last December Papua New Guinea 
-2-
bdcame self-governing, we in Australia no longer regarded it
as appropriate to have a minister responsible for it, so he
retained the position of Minister for Science but we have
wanted him to continue as Minister Assisting the Foreign
Minister in respect of the affairs of the South Pacific.
So, my Foreign Minister who is at the General Assembly of
the United Nations ( and I am bound there in the next couple
of days) has been very anxious that he should participate
on behalf of Australia in so far as Australia's participation
is appropriate in the affairs of this continent. Mr. Morrison
can participate on all the matters of substance which are on
your agenda. In addition, to indicate the interest which
we place in Australia in this representative body we have
brought with us two representatives of the Australian Parliament,
Senator Primmer and Senator Bonner. In Australia we believe
that representative institutions are extraordinarily important.
We are the last to deny that there are very great deficiencies
and shortcomings in Australia's representative institutions.
I could scarcely urge any country in the South Pacific to copy
Australia's political institutions a federal system or a
bicameral system. I don't urge this plan but naturally we still
have the idea that representative government is quite basic if
one is to involve the people in the affairs of government
if government is to be soundly based. We are in population
and also in area a very large country in South Pacific terms.
We therefore are aware that many people might believe us to be
unconcerned or remote or indifferent. We don't want you to
believe that we are indifferent or unconcerned. We have had
experience of very many problems which must concern you. Some
are matters which have arisen only in the last few years.
In the South Pacific the ratio of sea to land is greater than
any other part of the world. Accordingly, there are very many
international matters of navigation and resources which concern
all of us. It is just as important to Australia as it is to
any other country in the South Pacific that there should be
proper international standards set as for the rights of access
by surface or by air or underwater, whether it is for strategic,
political or economic purposes. You are very much aware that
in the South Pacific the law of the sea is quite basic if all
are concerned. There is no difference of interests between
Australia and archipelagos in the south seas. There are also
again many matters in the economic field where our concerns
in Australia may be different in degree but not in time from
those of all the other countries in the South Pacific. All
of us, Australia and all the other countries in the South Pacific,
have been concerned with the price that their products get elsewhere
in the world, the degree to which their products are processesed
in our own countries, the degree to which the products, the
resources of our countries are discovered or developed or marketed
by ourselves or by organisations in which we have a fair share
of the responsibility. And, in these days when inflation
affects so many countries and certainly all the countries with
which the South Pacific countries are trading or with which
they have relations relating to transport and the like, it
is very important that we should all understand the economic
opportunities properly. We want to ensure that even if we depend
on a very few products we can get a fair return from them as
we get a fair share in development. 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, the deliberations of the South
Pacific Conference are of concern to Australia not just because
we are all geographically so close but also because as far as
the rest of the world is concerned there are very many things
which concern us just as muclin Australia as they concern people
in the South Pacific. My minister, Mr. Morrison, will be
participating in the conference I am happy to say and will be
reporting to me and our other colleagues on the matters you raise
here. Looking over the last 25 or more years, we can take
quite a deal of satisfaction in the way that this very large
tract of the world's surface has come together, by the way
it has developed its appropriate institutions, the institutions
have changed as the needs have changed and it would seem to us
that this conference is the one which you can not only make
wider representation but it is the only comprehensive one and
despite all the political diversions, the differences, you must
confess, have been largely introduced in political terms in the
last 150 years. Despite all this we are coming to see in the
South Pacific how much we have in common and how much the things
which we each individually want to achieve can be more fully and
promptly achieved if we can consult together. Allow me to conclude
by saying how much more our deliberations will be promoted, how
much more harmonious as well as fruitful they will be because
we are meeting in this beautiful hall, on this beautiful island,
in this benine and benevolent regime. Well, I have only the
opportunity with my senior officials, my Treasurer and our wives
to thank you for your hospitality on our way to North America.
On the way back we will be calling into Fiji for the Centenary
of its association with Britain and at Norfolk Island to commemorate
the 200th anniversary of Captain Cook's landing at that then
uninhabited island, so our way between Australia and North America,
the United Nations, new President Ford, re-elected Prime Minister
Trudeau, will be made all the more interesting, we will be
fortified on our way, refreshed on our way back by going to the
islands of the South Pacific, our neighbours. And for those
who are fortunate enough to be spending weeks instead of days
on this island in this arghipelago, on behalf of the Australian
Government I wish you-/ 8HIy a happy but a very fruitful conference
believing that it will mark another big step in our associations
with the people of the South Pacific. 



AU^-\ LJTqt\ L. AN MISSION
TC3 TH 7= UN"' 7 NATIONS
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,
MR E. G. WHITLAM,
AT THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, NEW YORK,
MONDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER, 1974
Mr President, In this year in which Australia has established
diplomatic relation~ s with Algeria, it gives me particular
pleasure, as head of the Australian Government, to congratulate
you upon your election as President of this 29th Session of
the General Assembly. The Algerian experience has encompassed
many of the deepest problems facing the world and this world
Organisation today. Sir your nation's experience and your
own ensure distinction and significance to your occupancy of
this high post.
As head of the first Australian social democratic
government since Australia helped to found the United Nations
and to frame its Charter more than a quarter of a century ago,
I re-affirm our loyalty to both. Such pledges are easily
enough given; yet no nation makes them more sincerely, more
earnestly today than Australia.
No country needs more than Australia the fulfilment of
the international objectives of the United Nations to reach
the fulfilment of her own national objectives. There are few
countries in which the paradox is demonstrated with such force
1K 4% 44 
-2-
that true national independence depends upon international
interdependence. There are few nations to which the mirage
of national self-sufficiency can be made so tempting; yet
there are few nations for which that mirage can be so easily
shattered. Australia, fortunate In possession of great
resources, confident in the ability of her own people to
develop those resources, is nevertheless not ashamed to admit
her interdependence with her neighbours and her partners
across the world and her dependence upon them. We are a
people without illusions; we Australians neither falsely
exaggerate our strengths nor fearfully exaggerate our
weaknesses. It is precisely because we make a rational
assessment of our strengths and weaknesses that we recognise
that we depend upon a better international order to preserve
those things we most value about our national independence.
In seeking a better international order, we give primacy to
the United Nations.
It is therefore with growing concern that we witness
what can only be called a drift away from international order
and international co-operation at present occurring in world
affairs. Australia's concern springs not just from the real
difficulties created by recent events but, even more, from the
feeling that there has been a weakening of will, a loss of
momentum in Internationai determination to meet and overcome
those difficulties. Great hopes were born two years ago. The Australian
Government wholeheartedly endorsed the movement towards detente
between the United States and the Soviet Union. We wholeheartedly
supported China's return to her true place in the
family of nations in this Organisation and ' in the worldo We
wholeheartedly endorsed the Paris Agreement to end the war in
Vietnam. We therefore ratified the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty, moved our Chtna Embassy from Taipeh to Peking, and
ended Australia's own military Involvement In Indo-China.
Above all, we have been determined to do all we can -to
ensure that our region and the world should not for a second
time lose the opportunity for a new settlement, a new step
towards peace and progress, in the way that the chance was
thrown away after the war In Korea and after the Geneva
meetings in 1954. Yet we have to acknowledge that the hopes
springing from the remarkable events of 1971 and 1972 are
beginning to sour. There is increasingly a sense of drift, a
sense of events out of control. The task of~ this Assembly
should be to help stop that drift. Our natu,? l preoccupation
with our national problems -and for most of us
they are very great indeed must not lead to a loss of 
-3-
international concern and involvement. We cannot turn inwards.
E-en the ,! ost immediate problems of domestic worry such as
inflation which so many of us share, the strongest, the most
highly developed along with the weakest and the least
developed are in essence international problems, for which
there can be no ultimate, no complete national solution
without an international solution. No nation, no group of
nations, no bloc, no alliance, can live alone, can live
entirely to itself in this new world. We are all internationalists
now by necessity. Australia is internationalist
by necessity and by choice. Each of us has our bilateral
arrangements and our regional arrangements. Many, like
Australia, through treaty or trade or tradition, have
honourable alignments and valuable associations.
It is however through this Organisation, its Assembly
and its councils and through the specialised agencies, that
the enduring international settlements must ultimately be
sought and the drift away from international co-operation
must be arrested.
So there must be no loss of nerve, no loss of will
here. If we here lose our nerve, if we here allow that
drift to continue unchecked, we face the breakdown of the
nuclear non-proliferation treaty, the breakdown of world
economic order, the breakdown of all our high hopes and high
words about closing the gap between the developed and
developing nations and the breakdown of any claims of the
United Nations OrgA~ iisation to be an effective peace-keeper
and peace-maker.
We should all stand guilty of betrayal of our peoples
if we did not act now to stop the drift in these matters0
The special obligations which the might of the superpowers
imposes upon them should not be made an excuse for
indifference or~ Indecision on the part of? the rest of us0 We
continue to urge upon the superpowers the need for them both
to maintain the utmost mutual restraint in their relations
between themselves and towards us. They can, of course,
easily destroy each other; they can also destroy all of us0
!, 4e are entitled to ask them to move forward to a stage of
complete detente where their tremendous power can be used
jointly for the betterment of the whole civilizationo We
are entitled to insist upon restraint In their deployment
of forces overseas, in areas such as the Indian Ocean.
Australia is strongly opposed to the Indian Ocean becoming
a ground for competition, much less confrontation between the
great powers. 
-4-
Mutual restraint is also essential to prevent the
excesses and dangers of the nuclear arms race.
Let me recall that those of us who are so far parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
have given the nuclear powers certain rights; they in turn
have accepted certain responsibilities and given guarantees,
as part of a two-way process. We undertook not to develop
nuclear weapons in return for guarantees of protection and
assistance in the development of nuclear knowledge for peace.
Above all, the sponsoring powers undertook to promote and
maintain a world order based upon comprehensive disarmament.
Unless these obligations are sincerely fulfilled, the incentive
abroad and the pressure at home for more and more nations to
get nuclear weapons will increase. A co-operative effort by
all leaders must find effective means of halting the arms race
and preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. There is
nothing more urgent facing any of us today.
Australia there~ ore sees with deepest anxiety the
continuing and new testing of nuclear devices, the prospect
of an ever-increasing number of nat~ ons possessing nuclear
weapons, and an even greater number possessing the capability
of exploding nuclear devices. Where It has been open to
Australia, we have expressed our concern in action before
the International Court of Justice.
All of us face a nightmare world in which as many as
fifteen or twenty nations may possess nuclear weapons by the
early ' 080s. There is time to prevent it, We have perhaps
about a year, two years at the most in which to prevent it.
Now is the time; it may be our last chance.
For our part, the Australian Government pledges that
it will neither develop nor acquire nuclear weapons.
Our first aim must be to strengthen the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and work for Its acceptance everywhere.
Real and rapid progress can best be made through this Treaty.
We should build on what we have. We have not time to start
all over again. Six years after it was concluded and more
than four years after it came Into force, some States have
still to ratify the Treaty, or to make clear their
renunciation of nuclear weapons development. Certainly
we understand the difficulties the Treaty presents to some
nations. We understand their reservations0 We acknowledge
discriminatory aspects of the Treaty as it now stands0We 
would hope that the forthcoming Review Conference will remove
some of these difficulties, but the Conference will be more
successful and meaningful if more nation3 ratify the Treaty
and work within its framework to improve it and apply it.
Secondly, we should make a comprehensive treaty to ban
nuclear weapons testing an urgent priority. The treaties
which have been concluded and resolutions which have been
adopted are Important achievements, but they have not gone
far enough towards stopping the nuclear arms race. They are
only steps towards unive-sal and comprehensive agreement on
nuclear weapons testing. We must complete the journey.
Thirdly, we need effective international arrangements
to govern and control ruclear experiments for peaceful
purposes. We all recognise the promise which scientific
collaboration on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy holds
for economic development in the interests of all mankind.
But the world cannot afford the risks which lie in the
prospect where increasing numbers of countries possess
nuclear devices e'-en if they profess to have them for
peaceful purposes only. We cannot shrug off nuclear
explosions which present us with such a threat, particularly
those conducted outside existing safeguards and without
international inspection0 Australia seeks support for an
international arrangement by which all states could gain
access to nuclear explosive services under agreed and secure
international controls for peaceful purposes0 We urge all
nuclear states to co-operate In establishing such a service,
preferably under the auspices of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. I join with the Foreign Minister of Canada in
this call. Another approach to the goal of disarmament worth
serious exploration is the concept of peace zones. They are
of course no substitute for comprehensive disarmament and no
substitute f'or an effective Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Australia, however, takes a particular interest in the
agreements and proposals embodying this concept, because
most of them affect our continent and our region directly.
The Antarctic Treaty, the Indian Ocean peace zone, the ASEAN
declaration, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and the proposal by
Iran for a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East all
move in the right direction. They command Australia's broad
support since they assert the dangers inherent in an
uncontrolled, unregulated use of our planet for the deployment
of nuclear weapons; they seek to limit the development,
emplacement and use of nuclear weapons in the areas and 
-6-
environments they cover; they all express growing anxiety
about the spread of nuclear weapons; they all seek paths
towards reducing tensions among the nuclear powers. For the
Australian Government, these initiatives not only represent
ends In themselves but, we believe serve to stimulate
progress on other important measures intended to bring to
fulfilment the hopes of !. nkind to live in security, free
from the threat of nuclear war,
Let me say that Australia's anxiety about the nuclear
arms race does not blind us to the risks to international
peace and security from localised conflicts using conventional
weapons. We, the members of the international community,
stand condemned for our failure so far to find the sense of
responsibility and the means of authority to stop regional
disputes being settled by force. It is equally bad that
some members of the international community have made
possible for profit massive recourse to arms and the means
of waging wars about to start or already begun. A world order
which pcovmits. or which, by default, sanctions the large scale
transfer of weapons from one country to another where the risk
of conflict is high, is gravely at fault and very foolish. It
shortcircults the process of peaceful negotiation and puts
primacy upon settlement of disputes by war, by bloodshed, and
as always happens must always happen in modern war by the
bloodshed of the innocent.
Clearly, we still have far to go before the international
community will agree collectively to forsake the short term
gains on arms sales abroad in return for the longer term but
less tangible benefits that this self-denying ordinance would
confer on the weapons prn~ ucers. Nevertheless, we now ask
that the major weapons producing countries should set an
exo~ mple by imposing the strictest restrictions on the export
of arms abroad to areas where there is a clear risk of conflict.
Recent events have shown that preservation of peace is
more than a matter of arms control. It is also a matter of
keeping the peace when violence threatens or occurs. It is
not enough for members o the United Nations to pay lip service
to the United Nations' peace-keeping role. Individual members
have the duty to provide the material and financial resources
to allow the United Nations to deal with threats to security,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression.
Australia stands ready to participate in peace-keeping
operations in whatever way would be most useful. Australia is
of course allied by trep-ty with the United States, and we make 
-7-
no apologies for it. There is however no area of actual or
potential conflict anywhere in the world where loyalties,
ideology or interests, should make an Australian involvement
in peace-keeping unacceptable or unwelcome. We wish
Australba to be always among the first nations from which
the United Nations would ask for peace-keeping forces; we
shall be among the first~ to respond. We undertake to keep
the Secretary-General regularly informed on the nature and
size of contributions we are able to provide over a given
period. Australia fuirther believes that the importance of
preventive diplomacy must come to be more widely recognised
and accepted and that the ample provisions offered by this
Organisation for peace-keeping and good offices should be
reinvigorated, explored more thoroughly and more thoroughly
exploited. It is time, thern~ ore, to look again at the
hitherto untapped provisions of the United Nations Charter,
to make all that we can of its capacity to provide useful
contributions to such activ,: ties as fact-finding,
conciliation mediation and negotiation.
We here should particularly devote increased attention
to the role of the International Court of Justice. Not enough
nations use the Court. Members of the international community
cannot be compelled to take their cases before the Court but
we should strive to build confidence in its worth, its wisdom,
its worl rbility as one way of rationalising and harmonising
international relations. If the rule of international law
and justice is to prevail, then an international tribunal is
indispensable. The Court's jurisdiction should be widened0
Jurisdiction should become compulsory and universal. New
multilate~ al treaty arrangements like that which will
emerge from the Law of the Sea conference should enforce
compulsory settlement oP disputes, with the International
Court as the final court' 0o' appeal0 By such steps the rule
of law can be established and strengthened in a better world
order. In this difficult, complicated, crowded world we all
are creating for ourselves, the causes of conflict multiply.
Nuclear brinkmanship, ideology, border disputes, race hate,
religious bigotry, national ambitions, foreign exploitation
all provide actual or potential sources of tension, conflict,
bloodshed and war. Yet there remains for the future one of
the oldest of all the causes of war the threat of war for
the possession of resources. Huge population increases, the
revolution of rising expectations, the enormous and often 
-8-
wasteful demands our technological civilization makes upon the
world's resources, have increased the pressures on our world
civilization to the very threshold of the tolerable.
. For countries which lack resources the situation has
become critical. The developing countries have been grossly
disadvantaged. Last year's oil crisis brought this sharply
home to all of us developed and developing alike.
It is proper that In this world forum I should state
the Australian Government's attitude to the use and development
of Australia's own very considerable resources. There is no
place in our thinking f'or " economic nationalism" in its crudest
sense. We do, of course, wish to ensure steady markets at
fair prices for what we produce. We recognise the great scope
for increased co-operation between producers of raw materials
and for groups of exporting countries to associate to build a
better fr%-)-ework for orderly and rational development of
production and trade0 As a relatively developed and thriving
nation, which also produces many resources shared by developing
and poorer nations, Australia recognises its duty to cooperate
with such nations in obtaining fair and reasonable
return for our products. And we are co-operating. Equally
however we in Australia accept our responsibility to reassure
countries which depend upon our resources that they shall
have steady, secure access to those resources at fair prices.
We must protect our interests and we shall, but Australia is
not in the business of resources blackmail0 That is the way
to international disaster for producers and users alike0
Let us accept the plain fact that war for resources
or food or markets by any nation or group of nations would,
in modern times, represent the supreme folly0 There is no
war, nuclear or " conventional" by which the victor so-called,
assuming there was one, could conceivably win back by war the
resour0ces used and destroyed in waging it0 If we choose not
to listen to the voice of humanity against war, we might at
least listen to the voice of commonsense and indeed ordinary,
rational self-interest0
As a major food producer, Australia is particularly
interested in the proposals on~ food which President Ford and
Secretary of State Kissinger have made at this session0
Australia undertakes to work constructively and cooperatively
towards implementation of these proposals.
Suggestions such as the establishment of an international
system of grain reserves are thoroughly commendable and
deserve our most serious attention0 
-9-
Of all the changes which have occurred in the international
community since World War 11 none has more
profoundly altered the r7ace of the world than the accession
to independence by those peoples and states formerly under
colonial rule. The process is not yet complete, but we look
to a time in the near future when no territory will be
controlled against 4ts choice by a metropolitan power with
whom it has no geographical, social, racial, cultural
affinity. In this regard we particularly welcome recent
decisions of the Government of Portugal.
Australia has acted with determination and vigour to
apply the relevant artic', es of the Charter. Papua New Guinea
became self-governing on I December, 1973. It will become
fully independent as soon as the House of Assembly of Papua
New Guinea decides. We expect this decision soon. Let me
emphasise the decision we await is by the House of Assembly.
The Australian Government made its own decision long ago
we utterly reject a colonial role for Australia. Meanwhile
the Australian Government deals with the Government of Papua
New Guinea in all significant respects as that of a nation
already independent.
There is to me, I must say, a most satisfying symmetry
in the march of events by which Portugal the oldest, and
Australia the newest, of the colonial powers are acting at
the same time towards the liquidation of colonialism. Across
the distance of 400 years the new world in Australia clasps
hands with the old, in ending a false, demeaning, unworthy
power over others.*
The dramatic and welcome progress made towards the
dissolution of the oldest and last of the colonial empires
now enables -che United Nations to direct even more con%
centrated attention upon the twin evil of racism
particularly its posc-colonial manifestations in Southern
Africa. We must be unremitting in the efforts sanctioned
by the Assembly to break the illegal regime in Rhodesia, to
end South Africa's unlawful control over Nambibia and to end
apartheid. We should all make determined efforts to see
that the momentum which launched the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination is not lost. My
Government conscious that Australia's own record is
seriously flawed is determined to remove all forms of
racial discrimination within our own shores, notably now,
as notoriously in the past, against our own Aboriginals. 
While racism remains as cruel as any example of man's
inhumanity to man, we should not, however, overlook the
existence of other forms of discrimination which rob men
and women of their right to live in dignity and peace of
mind. Throughout the world political prisoners languish in
jails or are otherwise deprived of their civil liberties.
There are thoroughly unacceptable constraints on the right
of political asylum. Religious and ethnic minorities are
persecuted, workers are denied the protection of ILO
Conventions, women are denied equal opportunities. The
Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Willesee will during
the discussion be putting Australian submissions to express
our views and proposals on these matters.
There has never been a time in human history when the
truth of the one-ness, the indivisibility of humanity, has
been so manifest. It is no longer only a philosophical or
religious proposition but an assertion of sheer reason and
commanding commonsense, All the momentous recent developments
have profound implications for the future conduct of international
relations since they have one common theme the
interdependence of us all. That interdependence is now almost
total. An attempt by any state to bring about political or
economic change in another through unconstitutional,
clandestine, corrupt methods, by assassination or
terrorism, undermines the rule of international law,
encourages adventurism and anarchy, endangers world peace
and turns quite quickly against even the most powerful
nations who would seek to advance their cause by such
methods, The wilful erection of trade barriers by one state or
a group of states without regard to the hardship caused to
others can cr-eate economic dislocation around the world by
curtailing or closing export markets to which their
industries have become geared and on which their foreign
exchange earnings depend.
Refusal to recognise the inalienable rights of all
people to freedom and independence produces tension and
conflict not only between the oppressed and the oppressors
but between them and other nations which become associated
or involved in these just and legitimate struggles. 
-11-
Now more than ever, we look to the United Nations.
It has the experience, the stature and the capacity to help
us identify the sources of tension between nations, to
prescribe collective measures to mitigate and eventually
remove the causes of conflict, and to anticipate and prevent
situations developing which have the potential for disturbing
world peace.
Mr President, It is claimed that the world is now short on leadership.
It's truer to say that the nature, complexity and
universality of the problems rushing in upon us render
irrelevant and obsolete that concept of world leadership
whereby a handful of powerful men in charge of the most
powerful nations can chart the course for the rest of us to
follow. So the challenge of the United Nations to provide
a genuine and continuing source of leadership, of hope and
purpose for the world is more urgent, the opportunity more
real, than at any time in the Organlsation's history. In
the response we here make to that challenge, we shall be
judged as nations, as representatives of our nations and
as men and women not by our power or size or wealth, but
by the honesty of our efforts to promote and practice the
principles of the Charter of this United Nations. 


93D~SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P. 1AT THE OPENING OF THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE FEDERATEDMISCELLANEOUS WORKERS' UNION OF AUSTRALIA,DICKSON HOTEL, CANBERRA, 14 OCTOBER 1974I WELCOME THIS OPPORTUNITY, SO SOON AFTER RETURNINGTo AUSTRALIA, TO COMMENT DIRECTLY ON SOME OF THE BASICISSUES WHICH HAVE BEEN DEBATED IN AUSTRALIA IN THE LAST TWOWEEKS. I HAVE OF COURSE BEEN IN CLOSE TOUCH WITHDEVELOPMENTS AD DECISIONS AFFECTING'THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMYWHILE TRAVELLING OVERSEAS. IMAKE THAT POINT BECAUSEOUR OPPONENTS AND SOME SECTIONS OF THE PRESS HAVE TRIEDTO SPREAD THE IDEA THAT BECAUSE OVER THE LAST TWO WEEKSIHAVE ADDRESSED THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS.-HAD DISCUSSIONS WITH THE NEW PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATESAND THE RE-ELECTED PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA-AND ATTENDED THESOUTH PACIFIC CONFERENCE, THE Fiji CENTENNIAL AND THENORFOLK ISLAND BICENTENNIAL. THEN SOMEHOW I HAVE BEEU OUTOF TOUCH WITH AUSTRALIA AND INDIFFERENT TO DEVELOPMENTSAT HOME. IDO NOT NEED TO LABOUR THE ABSURDITY OF THISARGUMENT. IMERELY SAY THAT IN MY ABSENCE MY COLLEAGUESAND I HAVE CONSULTED AND WORKED TOGETHER. ICOMMEND THE ACTIONSTHEY HAVE TAKEN, THE DECISIONS WE HAVE TAKEN TOGETHER.-AS A GOVERNMENT, AS A TEAM. mi. / 2
-2-I REAFFIRM MY COMPLETE CONFIDENCE IN THE STABILITYOF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, MY COLLEAGUES ACTED DECISIVELYTO DEMONSTRATE THAT OUR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS BANKSAND BUILDING SOCIETIES ARE SOLID AS A ROCK, I BASE MYCONFIDENCE ON THE FUNDAMENTAL SOUNDNESS OF OUR ECONOMYON THE STRENGTH OF OUR NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE CONTINUINGECONOMIC PROGRAM OF THE GOVERNMENT, TODAY I SHALL REFERDIRECTLY AND FRANKLY TO THE PROBLEMS WHICH ARE FOUND INSOME DEGREE IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, FIRST, HOWEVER,I UTTERLY REJECT THE WARPED ATTITUDE OF THE OPPOSITION INSEEKING TO MISREPRESENT AND EXAGGERATE THE PROBLEMS WEFACE, FIDAMENTALLY THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS IN THE FIELDSOF EDUCATION, HEALTH AND TRANSPORT, AND THE GOVERNMENT'SDETERMINATION TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, MEANTHAT AUSTRALIANS CAN LOOK FORWARD TO A CONTINUING ANDIMPROVING HIGH STANDARD OF LIVING, OUR OPPONENTS, FORSELFISH POLITICAL REASONS, REJOICE IN CREATING AN ATMOSPHEREOF PANIC, CONFUSION AND RUMOUR-MONGERING, THEY PREACHABOUT A LACK OF CONFIDENCE, YET NOTHING DOES MORE -TODESTROY CONFIDENCE THAN THEIR OWN INCESSANT PROPHESIES OFDOOM AND DISASTER, LET US REJECT THESE MERCHANTS OF GLOOMAND THEIR MESSAGE OF DESPAIR, THESE NAGGING AND NEGATIVEMEN HAVE NOTHING TO OFFER US IN OUR PRESENT DIFFICULTIES, / 3
-3-I EXPRESS MY CONCERN NOT MORBID PESSIMISM, BUTA FRANK AND REALISTIC CONCERN ABOUT THE NUMBER OF AUSTRALIANSREGISTERED AS UNEMPLOYED. ON THIS ISSUE I EMPHASISE WITHALL THE FORCE AT MY COMMAND THAT THE GOVERNMENT REJECTS THECONSERVATIVE PHILOSOPHY WHICH SAYS THAT MASSIVEUNEMPLOYMENT SHOULD DELIBERATELY BE CREATED AS A DEVICEFOR SLOWING DOWN THE RATE OF INFLATION. IN MANAGING THEECONOMY THE GOVERNMENT CONTINUES TO PURSUE THE GOAL OFFULL EMPLOYKENT. ALL OF US WHO ARE INVOLVED INCONSIDERING THESE NATIONAL ISSUES SHOULD ACKNOWLEDGE THATIT IS NO SIMPLE MATTER, GIVEN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICFORCES, TO SECURE BOTH FULL EMPLOYMENT AND ALSO A LOWINFLATION RATE. OUR OPPONENTS PRETENDe QUITE DISHONESTLY,AND IN THE FACE OF EXPERIENCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES WITH.ECONOMIES SIMILAR TO OUR OWN, THAT THE LIBERAL PARTY ALONEHAS A MAGIC FORMULA TO ACHIEVE THIS GOAL. MY MEETINGSWITH WORLD LEADERS HAVE SHOWN ME JUST HOW COMPLEX, HOWUNIVERSAL, HOW DIFFICULT THIS PROBLEM is. No ONE HASFOUND A SOLUTION EXCEPT THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITLON INAUSTRALIA, AND MRWII WJINI MdAHON. I AM GLAD TO SEE THATMR MCMAHON HAS EMERGED AS CHIEF LIBERAL SPOKESMAN ONTHE ECONOMY-WITH THE EXCEPTION OF O-IS LEADER HE KNOWSMORE* ABOUT ECONOMIC MISMANAGEMENT THAN ANYONE IN AUSTRALIA.THEIR EXPERIENCE IS UNRIVALLED. THEY ARE THE ARCHITECTSOF THE TWO MOST DISASTROUS BUDGETS IN RECENT HISTORY.BETWEEN THEM THEY CREATED THE CONDITIONS WHICH HAVE LED TOOUR PRESENT INFLATION. YOU DON'T HAVE TO TAKE MY WORD ' FORIT. I GIVE YOU THIS QUOTATION FROM AN EDITORIAL IN OURLEADING ECONOMIC JOURNAL, THE " AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW".iss/ 4
L4f r -u /; iA/THIS IS WHAT THE " FINANCIAL REVIEW" HAD TO SAY/ ABOUTTHE RECORD OF OUR TWO CHIEF DOOM-SAYERS:" THE MCMAHON GOVERNMENT... FOR ELECTORAL REASONS,PROMOTED A RATE OF MONETARY EXPANSION WHICH WASTOTALLY UNJUSTIFIABLE IN ITS RAPIDITY ANDWHICH, WITH THE ACCOMPANYING RATE OF CAPITALINFLOW, WAS MAINLY RESPONSIBLE FOR THEDEMAND INFLATION OF 1972-73 AND THE INEVITABLECONSEQUENCE OF THE CURRENT COST INFLATION.THIS IS SOMETHING WHICH HAS BEEN SAID OFTENENOUGH BEFORE, BUT WHICH SHOULD NOT BEFORGOTTEN IN THE HEAT OF POLITICAL CONTROVERSY..."IN ITS ECONOMIC POLICY THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADYINDICATED ITS DETERMINATION TO TAKE IMMEDIATE ANDAPPROPRIATE ACTION IN ORDER TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.THE TREASURER'S STATEMENT, MADE WHEN PRESENTING THE BUDGET,SAID THAT " SHOULD THE NEED ARISE, WE STAND READY DURINGTHE YEAR TO TAKE ACTION ON THE EXPENDITURE OR REVENUE SIDEOF THE BUDGET TO GIVE A QUICK STIMULUS TO DEMAND ANDEMPLOYMENT. CRUCIAL AS THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION IS,IT CANNOT BE MADE THE SOLE OBJECTIVE OF GOVERNMENT POLICY.THIS GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE PROGRAM OF SOCIALREFORM TO IMPROVE THE POSITION OF THE LESS PRIVILEGEDGROUPS IN OUR SOCIETY AND TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENTOPPORTUNITIES." -4-
THE ALTERATION IN THE EXCHANGE RATE WHICH WEMADE ON 25 SEPTEMBER WAS ONE IMPORTANT EXAMPLE OF OURWILLINGNESS TO BE FLEXIBLE AND RESPOND TO DEVELOPMENTS INTHE ECONOMY. THE GOVERNMENT SHOWED BY THAT ACTION ITSSENSITIVITY TO THE CLIMATE IN WHICH BUSINESS OPERATES.THE NEW EXCHANGE RATE WILL ASSIST IN RESTORING THE GENERALLEVEL OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY AND IN MAINTAININGEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES. THE EASING OF CREDIT WILL HAVETHE SAME EFFECT. I EMPHASISE OUR UNDERTAKING THAT ANYAVOIDABLE TENDENCY FOR UNEMPLOYMENT TO INCREASE WILL BECHECKED BY GOVERNMENT ACTION. IN ITS POLICIES TO REDUCEINFLATION AND MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, THEGOVERNMENT NEEDS THE ACTIVE COOPERATION OF TRADE UNIONS,EMPLOYERS AND STATE GOVERNMENTS. I BELIEVE THEAUSTRALIAN PEOPLE EXPECT THAT COOPERATION AND WILL BEMAKING THEIR JUDGMENTS ACCORDINGLY.SOME AUSTRALIANS MAY FIND THE CURRENT PUBLICDEBATE ON IMPORTANT POLICY ISSUES DISTURBING BECAUSE MOSTOF US WANT LIFE TO GO ON SMOOTHLY AND WITHOUT ANY PROBLEMS.HOWEVER, SOME OF THE CURRENT DEBATE AND DISCUSSION ON POLICYISSUES IS NECESSARY BECAUSE OF THE VERY REAL COMPLEXITY OFTHE RELATED MATTERS OF COUNTERING INFLATION, MAINTAININGEMPLOYMENT LEVELS, AND CONTINUING THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM.,/ 6
BECAUSE THE POLICIES NEEDED TO COUNTER BOTHINFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT ARE COMPLEX IN THEIR RELATIONSHIPTO EACH OTHER THE GOVERNMENT IS USING A NUMBER OF DEVICESTO ACHIEVE ITS ENDS. IN SPEAKING ABOUT MEASURES TOMAINTAIN THE LEVEL OF EMPLOYMENT WE CAN LIST THEFOLLOWING ACTIONS:FIRST, WE HAVE THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENTSCHEME WHICH IS DESIGNED TO IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIESIN CERTAIN GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS WHERE UNEMPLOYMENT EXISTS.THE SCHEME WILL ENCOURAGE LOCAL INITIATIVES IN SUCH AREAS.THE RELEVANT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY, FOR EXAMPLE,. WILLBE ENCOURAGED TO SUGGEST SUITABLE LABOUR-INTENSIVE WORKPROGRAMS WHICH WILL HELP BUILD UP PUBLIC FACILITIES-INTHE AREAS CONCERNED.SECONDLY, THE NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND TRAININGSYSTEM WILL PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE TRAINING AND RETRAININGSCHEMES. IN THE DETAILS ALREADY ANNOUNCED THE GOVERNMENTHAS SAID THAT IT WILL GIVE PRIORITY TO THOSE SEEKINGRETRAINING BECAUSE OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRYOR BECAUSE OF GOVERNMENT POLICIES SUCH AS THE ACTION LASTYEAR IN REDUCING TARIFF LEVELS BY 25 PER CENT. THEMINISTER FOR LABOUR IS INTRODUCING THIS TRAINING SYSTEMAS FAST AS POSSIBLE. REMEMBER THAT WE HAVE HAD TO SET UPA COMPREHENSIVE NATIONAL RETRAINING SYSTEM VIRTUALLYFROM NOTHING BECAUSE THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT DID NOTHINGIN THIS FIELD IN ITS 23 YEARS OF OFFICE. a/ 7
-7-THIRDLY, ANY PEOPLE WHO LOST THEIR JOBS EITHERDIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY BECAUSE OF THE GOVERNMENT'S TARIFFCHANGES CAN BENEFIT FROM A RANGE OF ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCEMEASURES, FOURTHLY, IN A MORE WIDE-RANGING APPROACH, THEBUDGET SHOWED THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO MAINTAINEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY, I HAVEALREADY EMPiASISED THAT THE GOVERNMENT STANDS READY TOTAKE FURTHER STEPS TO ENSURE CONTINUED PROGRESS INBUILDING UP EMPLOYMENT,FIFTHLY, THE CHANGE IN THE EXCHANGE RATE, RECENTLYANNOUNCED, IS A PARTICULAR MEASURE WHICH WILL HELP TO PROTECTEMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES BY IMPROVING THE COMPETITIVEPOSITION IN THE AUSTRALIAN MARKET OF INDUSTRIES COMPETING WITHIMPORTS AND THE COMPETITIVE POSITION ON OVERSEAS MARKETS OFAUSTRALIA'S EXPORT INDUSTRIES,IN REAFFIRMING MY CONFIDENCE IN THE LONG-TERMBASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY I AGAIN DECLARE THAT THEGOVERNMENT CANNOT AND WILL NOT BE DETERRED FROM THE PROGRAMWHICH THE PEOPLE TWICE ELECTED US TO CARRY OUT, WE MUSTOVERCOME THE PROBLEM OF OVERCROWDED AND INSUFFICIENTLYSTAFFED SCHOOLS A SITUATION INHERITED AFTER A GENERATIONOF NEGLECT BY THE LIBERAL PARTY, 1 ,/ 8I
-8-IN AUSTRALIA THE WELL-TO-DO HAVE READY ACCESS TOSOPHISTICATED HEALTH SERVICES WHICH PEOPLE ON MIDDLE ANDLOWER INCOMES MAY OFTEN BE DENIED, OUR OPPONENTS ARECOMPLACENT ABOUT SUCH INEQUALITIES IN AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY,THE CONTINUING PROGRAM OF MAJOR REFORM BY THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT IN THE FIELDS OF EDUCATION, HEALTH, TRANSPORTAND GENERALLY IMPROVING COMMUNITY FACILTIES MEANS THATGOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES WILL HELP SUSTAIN THE GENERALLEVEL OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY, AT A TIME WHEN SOME AREAS INPRIVATE INDUSTRY ARE PROCEEDING SOMEWHAT CAUTIOUSLYWITH THEIR PLANS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND EXPANSION THISCONTINUING PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT ACTION IS OF SPECIALADVANTAGE TO THE ECONOMY AS A WHOLE,To KEEP OUR PRESENT DIFFICULTIES IN PERSPECTIVE,IT IS USEFUL TO MAKE SOME COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIANEXPERIENCE AND EXPERIENCES IN OTHER COUNTRIES, WE CANLOOK AT THE RATE OF INFLATION IN THE 24 COUNTRIES WHO AREMEMBERS OF THE ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION ANDDEVELOPMENT( OECD), IN 1961-71 THE AVERAGE RATE OF INFLATIONIN THESE 24 COUNTRIES WAS 3,7 PER CENT, IN 1972 THEAVERAGE RATE OF INFLATION IN THE OECD COUNTRIES WAS 4.7PER CENT AND IN 1973 IT ROSE TO 7,7 PER CENT, AT THE PRESENTTIMEt TAKING THE YEAR TO AUGUST 1974, THE AVERAGE RATE OFINFLATION IN THE OECD COUNTRIES IS 13.4 PER CENT, THEANNUAL RATE IN AUSTRALIA AS INDICATED BY THE MOST RECENTQUARTERLY FIGURES IS 14,4 PER CENT,
-9-IN OTHER WORDS, IN 24 COUNTRIES ALL AROUND THE WORLD,INCLUDING ECONOMIES VERY SIMILAR TO AUSTRALIA, THERE HASBEEN A STRONG TENDENCY FOR THE RATE OF INFLATION TOINCREASE, EVEN THE MOST NEUROTIC OPPONENTS OF THEGOVERNMENT WILL CONCEDE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTDOES NOT CONTROL THE ECONOMIES OF THE USA,, CANADA, THEUNITED KINGDOM AND THE OTHER MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE OECD.ALL THAT HAS HAPPENED IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY INITS CHANGE IN PRICE LEVELS HAS HAD AN EXPERIENCE SIMILARTO THAT OF MOST OTHER COUNTRIES,LOOKING AT THE QUESTION OF UNEMPLOYMENT INTERMS OF INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS IS NOT A SIMPLE MATTERBECAUSE OF THE DIFFERENT DEFINITIONS OF UNEMPLOYMENT INVARIOUS COUNTRIES, HOWEVER, WE CAN NOTE THAT IN BROADTERMS WE HAVE IN THE UNITED STATES AND IN CANADA OFFICIALUNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES WHICH ARE ABOVE FIVE PER CENT COMPAREDWITH THE AUSTRALIAN FIGURE FOR SEPTEMBER 1974 OF JUSTOVER TWO PER CENT, I AM NOT SAYING THAT WE SHOULD RESTEASY MERELY BECAUSE THE ECONOMIES OF THE UNITED STATES ANDCANADA ARE SUFFERING FROM AN UNEMPLOYMENT RATE WHICH ISMUCH WORSE THAN OUR OWN.
UNLIKE OUR OPPONENTS WE DO NOT REGARD ANY INCREASE INUNEMPLOYMENT AS " ACCEPTABLE OR " TOLERABLE" I iEWSPAPERSHAVE RECORDED THE ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES OF THESE COUNTRIESAND ALSO THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS FACING BRITAIN. ALL I AMSAYING IS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY, IN WHICHINTERNATIONAL TRADE PLAYS A SIGNIFICANT PARTI IS INEVITABLYAFFECTED BY SOME OF THE ADVERSE FORCES WHICH ARE FOUNDIN THE ECONOMIES OF VARIOUS OVERSEAS COUNTRIES,ALL IN ALL WE CAN SAY THAT AUSTRALIANS WHILETACKLING THEIR OWN ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, SHOULD REMEMBER THATTHEIR STANDARD OF LIVING AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM'FORA BETTER LIFE FOR EVERY FAMILY COMPARE VERY WELLI NOTJUST WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN OUR REGION, BUT WITHTHE STANDARD OF LIVING IN MOST OTHER WESTERN ECONOMIES,THERE IS A SEPARATE AND FUNDAMENTAL ISSUE WHICHOUR OPPONENTS WOULD LIKE TO OBSCURE, IN THEIR CRITICISMOF THE GOVERNMENT THE OPPOSITION IS ASKING THE PUBLIC TOACCEPT THAT THE PERSONAL INCOME OF THE FAMILY MAN IS ALLTHAT MATTERS, AND CAN BE CONSIDERED IN ISOLATION FROMEVERYTHING ELSE THAT HAPPENS TO HIM AND TO HIS FAMILY,AN AUSTRALIAN FAMILY DEPENDS ON ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESTO MEET ITS NEEDS, IN ADDITION TO THE NEEDS WHICH ITFULFILS FOR ITSELF FROM ITS OWN DIRECT INCOME, ,/ ii
-11-TAXES PAID BY ORDINARY AUSTRALIANS ARE NOT BEING FEDINTO SOME MYSTERIOUS MACHINE IN CANBERRA WHICH ISOPERATED FOR THE SOLE BENEFIT OF THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT,THE GOVERNMENT HAS NO INCOME OR PURPOSES WHICH ARESEPARATE FROM THOSE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY,AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS, THROUGH THEIR TAXES, ARE PROVIDINGTHE FUNDS TO PAY FOR THE ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESWHICH ARE NECESSARY IN A MODERN ADVANCING COUNTRY,IN ADDITION TO THE GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN THAT WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS SHOULD CONTINUE TO IMPROVE THEIR TAKE-HOMEPAY, THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY HAS DECIDED THAT ESSENTIALCOMMUNITY SERVICES MUST BE PROVIDED AND MUST BE IMPROVED,THE GOVERNMENT REJECTS THE IDEA THAT EVERY CITIZEN SHOULDBE ENTIRELY SELF-CENTRED IN THE WAY HE DISPOSES OF HISINCOME AND IN HIS RELATIONSHIP TO THE WIDER COMMUNITY,WE REJECT THE NOTION OF " EVERY MAN FOR HIMSELF", BECAUSETHIS ATTITUDE WAS ENCOURAGED BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTWE HAVE STILL IN MANY PARTS OF AUSTRALIA NEGLECTED SCHOOLS,INEFFECTIVE HEALTH SERVICES, HOPELESSLY INADEQUATEAND UNCORDINATED SYSTEMS OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT, A HUGHBACKLOG OF UNSEWERED HOUSES AND ALL THE PROBLEMS OFOVERCROWDING IN OUR MAIN CITIES, To ANY REASONABLE PERSONIT MUST BE CLEAR THAT PROVIDING ESSENTIAL COMMUNITYSERVICES IS NOT SOMETHING WHICH CAN BE DONE IN JUST A YEAROR TWO, PARTICULARLY AFTER 23 YEARS OF COMPLACENT NEGLECT,OUR OPPONENTS WANT THE ORDINARY AUSTRALIAN TO THINK ONLYOF WHAT HE PAYS IN TAXES AND TO NEGLECT THE GIANT STRIDESTHAT HAVE BEEN TAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCEBEING ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972, / 12
-12-THE BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 ANNOUNCED AN EXPENDITUREON EDUCATION OF $ 1,535 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF 78 PER CENTON THE PREVIOUS YEAR, HEALTH EXPENDITURE ROSE BY21 PER CENT IN 1973/ 74 AND ' IS SET TO RISE BY $ 285 MILLIONOR 30 PER CENT THIS YEAR, OUR EXPENDITURE ON SOCIALSECURITY AND WELFARE AMOUNTS TO NEARLY ONE QUARTER OFBUDGET OUTLAYS AND IS EXPECTED TO REACH $ 3,441,5 MILLIONTHIS YEARI AN INCREASE OF 38,3 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR,WHICH WAS ITSELF WELL UP ON THE PREVIOUS YEAR, OUTLAYSON HOUSING ARE SET TO REACH A RECORD $ 401 MILLION THISYEAR, COMPARED WITH $ 77 MILLION SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORSIN THEIR LAST YEAR IN OFFICE, EXPENDITURE ON URBANIMPROVEMENTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT WILL ALMOST REACH$ 400 MILLION, A THREE-FOLD INCREASE ON LAST YEAR ANDEIGHT TIMES THE AMOUNT SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN1972/ 73, WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN IMPORTANT STEPS IN IMPROVINGPUBLIC TRANSPORT, WATER SUPPLY AND ELECTRICITY, RETRAINING,REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION ANDREHABILIATION SCHEMES,WHILE THIS LIST IS OBVIOUSLY NOT AN EXHAUSTIVESTATEMENT I WOULD EMPHASISE THAT THESE PROGRAMS ALL SERVETO CHANNEL RESOURCES INTO AREAS OF MOST BENEFIT TO LOWAND MIDDLE INCOME GROUPS, / 13
-13-THE CHANGES IN THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX SCALEANNOUNCED IN THE BUDGET WILL LEAD TO A FURTHER IMPROVEMENTIN THE REAL INCOME AND LIVING CONDITIONS OF WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS, PARTICULARLY THOSE IN LOWER INCOMEBRACKETS, TO THE ORDINARY'AUSTRALIAN TAXPAYER, TO THOSEWHO NEED PERSUASION ON THIS ISSUE, I MAKE AN OBVIOUSPOINT: THE HEALTH CENTRES, HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS, BETTERTRANSPORT AND ALL THE OTHER ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY SERVICESDO COST LARGE SUMS OF MONEY, THIS IS ALL THE MORE TRUEAS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SETS OUT WITH DETERMINATIONTO MAKE UP FOR THE HOSTILITY AND NEGLECT WHICH OURPREDECESSORS SHOWED TOWARDS THESE COMMUNITY SERVICES,WHO WOULD DENY HEALTH CARE AND A GOOD EDUCATION TO THECHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA? THIS IS A PERFECTLY FAIR QUESTIONBECAUSE THIS IS PRECISELY WHAT WOULD BE DENIED TO THECHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA IF THE FORMER REGIME HAD ITS WAY,ALTHOUGH THEY TRY TO HIDE WHAT THEY ARE REALLY SAYING IT ISNOTHING LESS THAN A PROPOSITION THAT THE AVERAGE AUSTRALIANFAMILY SHOULD " MAKE DO" AND SHOULD PUT UP WITH CROWDEDSCHOOLS, AN OVER-WORKED AND INEFFICIENT HEALTH SYSTEM,CHAOTIC TRANSPORT SYSTEMS, POLLUTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAND THE OTHER EVILS WHICH FOLLOW IF YOU NEGLECT OURCOMMUNITY SERVICES, I AM SURE MY MESSAGE IS PERFECTLY CLEAR,1 ,/ 14
-14-WHAT THE GOVERNMENT WANTS TO GET ACROSS TO THE PEOPLEIS THIS BASIC IDEA: A DECENT AND IMPROVING STANDARDOF LIVING IS NOT MERELY OBTAINED BY CHASING A HIGHERLEVEL OF PERSONAL INCOME. A DECENT WAY OF LIVINGAND CONTINUING IMPROVEMENTS IN THE STANDARD OF LIVINGFOR ALL AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES IS ACHIEVED, IN FACT, INTWO WAYS: BY STEADY IMPROVEMENTS IN THE PURCHASING POWEROF OUR PERSONAL INCOMES AD BY THE USE OF MODERNCOMMUNITY SERVICES WHICH MEET THE REAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE,IT IS TRUE THAT RAPID PROGRESS IN HEALTH ANDEDUCATION AND OTHER AREAS IS MADE MORE DIFFICULT BY CERTAINCURRENT ECONOMIC PROBLEMS, WHEN, EARLIER IN THIS SPEECH,I ASSESSED THE AUSTRALIAN SITUATION AND MADE SOMEREASONABLE INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS, I WAS IN EFFECTEXPRESSING MY AGREEMENT WITH THE OPENING LINES OF THERESOLUTION CARRIED BY THE MEETING OF ACTU UNIONS INSYDNEY ON 24 SEPTEMBER, THE ACTU RESOLUTION SAID THAT" THE TWO PROBLEMS OF INCREASING INFLATION AND RISINGUNEMPLOYMENT ARE NOT UNIQUE TO AUSTRALIA". MY GOVERNMENTWAS HEARTENED BY THE FACT THAT THE ACTU CONFERENCE OFUNIONS EXPRESSED " ITS GENERAL SUPPORT FOR THE SOCIALCONCEPTS AND ECONOMIC STRATEGY CONTAINED IN THE BUDGETIN 1974/ 75", IN RELATION TO WHAT I HAVE SAID ABOUT THEIMPORTANCE OF PROVIDING COMMUNITY SERVICES THE GOVERNMENTALSO WELCOMES THE ACTU SUPPORT FOR WHAT IT DESCRIBED AS" THE SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASED OUTLAYS UPON EDUCATION.HEALTH, WELFARE AND URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
THE ACTU RESOLUTION STATED CERTAIN POLICY GOALSOF THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT, WE DO NOT FIND THE LISTINGOF THOSE POLICY AIMS STRANGE OR SOMETHING WHICH NEED CAUSEDISAGREEMENT WITH THE GOVERNMENT, IT IS PART OF THETRADITION OF THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT THAT IT SHOULDIDENTIFY THE IDEALS AND THE POLICIES WHICH IN THE FUTUREWILL SERVE THE NEEDS OF THEIR MEMBERS,. THESE PROPOSALSAND THE GOVERNMENT'S OWN ECONOMIC POLICY ARE TO BEDISCUSSED AT A MEETING BETWEEN THE ACTU AND THEGOVERNMENT, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IN THE PRINCIPLEOF CONSULTATION WITH COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS ANDON THE SUBJECT OF PAY FIXATION AND ECONOMIC POLICY ITIS RELEVANT FOR THE GOVERNMENT TO HAVE DISCUSSIONSWITH THE ACTU. THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SAME WAY HASCONSULTED, AND WILL CONTINUE TO CONSULT, WITHEMPLOYER ORGANISATIONS, PRIMARY PRODUCERS AND OTHERBODIES EXPRESSING A WHOLE RANGE OF VIEWS WITHIN THEAUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, / 16
-16-THE DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT AND TRADEUNION SPOKESMEN WHICH ARE PRINCIPALLY TAKING PLACE UNDERTHE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE ARBITRATIONCOMMISSION, MR JUSTICE MOORE, WILL BE COVERING THE EXACTDETAILS OF WAGE INDEXATION AND OTHER ASPECTS OF PAY FIXATION.HOWEVER, I WANT TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO CLEAR UP ACOMMON MISUNDERSTANDING ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON WAGESAND SALARIES. I SPEAK NOW TO ALL OF AUSTRALIA'S WAGE ANDSALARY EARNERS-AND I SAY TO THEM THATTHE OBJECT OF THEGOVERNMENT'S POLICY OF RESTRAINT IN THE GROWTH OF WAGES ANDOTHER INCOMES IS TO SLOW DOWN THE EXCESSIVE AND SELF-DEFEATINGESCALATION OF MONEY INCOMES. THE GOVERNMENT NEVER INTENDSNOR EXPECTS ANY REDUCTION IN THE PURCHASING POWER OF WAGES.ON THE CONTRARY, THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT A SLOWER GROWTHIN MONEY INCOMES WOULD ENHANCE THE PROSPECTS FOR FASTER GROWTHIN REAL WAGES AND IN LIVING STANDARDS.As I HAVE SAID, PROPOSALS ON PAY FIXATION ARE BEINGCONSIDERED BY THE CONFERENCE BEING CHAIRED BY MR JUSTICE MOORE.THE GOVERNMENT IS REPRESENTED IN THAT CONFERENCE AND WILL MAKEA CONSTRUCTIVE CONTRIBUTION TO PROMOTE AGREEMENT BETWEEN ALLTHE PARTIES. THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECLARED ITS SUPPORT FORQUARTERLY COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS, COMMONLY DESCRIBED TODAYAS INDEXATION, IN THE BELIEF THAT SUCH ARRANGEMENTS, AS PART OFA PACKAGE, WILL HELP TO RESTRAIN THE EXCESSIVE GROWTH IN MONEYWAGES TO WHICH I REFERRED WITHOUT DEPRIVING WAGE EARNERS OF THEPROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT OF REAL EARNINGS MADE POSSIBLE BY RISINGNATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY.
-17-I TURN NOW TO SOME REMARKS WITH PARTICULAR RELEVANCETO YOUR OWN ORGANISATION, PLEASE LET ME SAY THAT I WELCOMETHE OPPORTUNITY TO BE WITH YOU AT THE TIME OF YOUR FEDERALCONFERENCE, I AM VERY MUCH AWARE OF THE SUPPORT, IN FINANCIALAND MORAL TERMS, WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAS RECEIVEDFROM THE MWU, IN THE YEARS LEADING UP TO OUR WIN IN 1972AND ALSO IN THE PERIOD SINCE THEN,I AM AWARE OF YOUR SUCCESS IN EXTENDING YOUR MEMBERSHIPRULES SO THAT YOUR UNION IS ESTABLISHED IN EFFECT AS BOTH ACRAFT AND AN INDUSTRY ORGANISATION$ YOU HAVE COME A LONG WAYSINCE YOUR ORGANISATION WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1915. You HAVE 13BRANCHES IN ALL AROUND AUSTRALIA AND YOUR UNION HAS ALMOST120 FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES IN THE VARIOUS STATES AND TERRITORIES,YOU HAVE ALREADY ESTABLISHED A REPUTATION AS A MODERN GO-AHEADTRADE UNION AND THIS IS SHOWN BY YOUR EMPLOYMENT OF 10 RESEARCHOFFICERS, YOUR DIVERSITY IN MEMBERSHIP COVERAGE IS AREFLECTION OF THE FACT THAT YOUR TRADE UNION SERVICES SOME360-AWARDS, DETERMINATIONS AND AGREEMENTS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.I AM HEARTENED BY THE FACT THAT YOUR UNION, WITH ITS90,000 MEMBERS, HAS ALL ITS BRANCHES AFFILIATED WITH THEAUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, / 18
-18-. II PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR SUCCESS IN ENTERING INTO NOFEWER THAN 15 AMALGAMATIONS WITH VARIOUS TRADE UNION BODIES.MY GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT TO ENCOURAGE TRADE UNION AMALGAMATIONSO THAT DEMARCATION DISPUTES ARE AVOIDED. THERE IS ALSO THECONSIDERABLE ADVANTAGE FOR EMPLOYEES TO HAVE A LARGE MODERNTRADE UNION WHICH CAN REPRESENT THEM IN AN EXPERT WAY ANDWHICH CAN PROVIDE ALL THE SKILLS REQUIRED FOR'THE PROCEDURESOF NEGOTIATION AND ARBITRATION. THE. GOVERNMENT WELCOMESSUPPORT FROM EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS SUCH AS YOUR OWN AND FROMMANY OTHER GROUPS IN THE COMMUNITY WHO ARE CONTINUING TOSUPPORT THE PROGRAM OF THE GOVERNMENT.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITL. AM, M. P. f
AT THE INAUGURATION OF THE ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE.-
SIDING SPRING, NSW.
WEDNESDAY, 16 OCTOBER, 1974
THERE COULD BE NO MORE FITTING SYMBOL OF THE
ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN RELATIONSHIP THAN THIS TELESCOPES IT
COMMEMORATES A SPIRIT OF SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOUR -AND A
HISTORY OF ASTRONOMICAL RESEARCH -THAT BEGAN WITH COOK'S
FIRST VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH SEAS. THE ASTRONOMERS OF THE
ROYAL. SOCIETY IN THE LATE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY SET OUT TO
OBSERVE THE TRANSIT OF VENUS. COOK FINISHED UP CHARTING
THE EAST COAST OF AUSTRALIA. ASTRONOMERS WHO IN SUCH
MATTERS, AS IN ALL THINGS, TAKE THE LONG VIEW WILL..
DOUBTLESS CONTINUE TO ARGUE WHICH OF THESE PHENOMENA WAS.
MORE IMPORTANT. THE FACT REMAINS THAT THE COLONISATION OF*
AUSTRALIA By EUROPEANS HAD ITS ORIGINS IN AN
ASTRONOMICAL PROJECT. TRADE FOLLOWED THE FLAG, BUT THE
FLAG FOLLOWED THE TELESCOPE. IT MAY NOT BE TOO ROMANTIC
TO SUGGEST THAT THE TELESCOPE ON THE ENDEAVOUR WAS AS
POTENT A SYMBOI OF BRITAIN.' S IMPERIAL GREATNESS AS
NELSON'S TELESCOPE ON THE VICTORY. MORE THAN TWO CENTURIES
AFTER COOK'S VOYAGE, BRITISH AND AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMERS
CAN NOW PURSUE THEIR OBSERVATIONS OF THE SOUTHERN SKIES
WITH THIS NEW ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE THIS BRILLIANT
EXAMPLE OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY AND PRECISION ENGINEERING
WHICH WE SEE BEFORE US. om./ 2 
-2-
I COMMEND PROFESSOR HOYLE'S VIEW. THAT " A-TELESCOPE
IS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE THINGS WHICH OUR CIVILIZATION
DOES WELL". ITIS A GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE'THINGS WHICH
A TRUE CIVILIZATION ALONE CAN DO. ASTRONOMY IS ONE OF
THE FEW SCIENTIFIC PURSUITS CERTAIN BRANCHES OF
MATHEMATICS, CERTAIN BRANCHES OF. THEORETICAL NUCLEAR
PHYSICS ARE OTHERS WHICH EXIST FOR-NO OTHER PURPOSE
THAN THE PURE SEARCH FOR KNOWLEDGE. No ONE DOUBTS THAT
ASTRONOMY HAS ITS PRACTICAL USES, GOVERNMENTS ARE
FREQUENTLY REMINDED OF THEM BY ASTRONOMERS THEMSELVES.-
NEVERTHELESS, THE TRUE GLORY OF ASTRONOMY LIES IN THE
VALUE IT PLACES ON KNOWLEDGE FOR ITS OWN SAKE KNOWLEDGE
OF AN ABSOLUTE AND FUNDAMENTAL KIND. No CIVILIZATION
CAN REMAIN INDIFFERENT TO THE ORIGINS OF THE EARTH OR
ITS PLACE IN THE COSMOS.
ASTRONOMY IS RICH IN THEORIES BUT SOMEWHAT
DEFICIENT IN PRACTICAL RESULTS. IN THAT RESPECT IT CAN
BE LIKENED TO ECONOMICS. IN ITS ATTEMPT TO PROVIDE
ANSWERS TO THE ULTIMATE QUESTIONS ABOUT MAN'S ENVIRONMENT
AND HIS PLACE IN REALITY, IT CAN BE LIKENED TO RELIGION.
IT IS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE HIGH PRIESTS OF ASTRONOMY
CONDUCT THEIR NOCTURNAL RITES IN REMOTE TEMPLES ON
INACCESSIBLE MOUNTAINTOPS. SO I THINK THERE IS AN
EXCELLENT CASE FOR GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR ASTRONOMY, JUST
AS WE GIVE STATE AID TO OTHER RELIGIOUS ENTERPRISES. WE
ARE NOT ALONE IN THIS. THE AMERICANS, A PRAGMATIC AND
HARD-HEADED PEOPLE, HAVE PROVIDED VAST PUBLIC FUNDS FOR
/ 3 
-3-
A SPACE PROGRAM WHOSE ULTIMATE PURPOSE IS TO ADD
TO MAN'S KNOWLEDGE OF THE COSMOS AND HIS PLACE
WITHIN IT. I WOULD NOT WISH TO JUSTIFY THE
SCALE OF THAT EXPENDITURE, BUT I APPROVE
WHOLEHEARIEDLY THE PURPOSES BEHIND IT.
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR ASTRONOMY HAS A
LONG HISTORY. IT CAN BE TRACED FROM THE ANCIENT
CIVILIZATIONS TO THE PRESENT DAY, FROM THE
EGYPTIANS, THE PERSIANS, COPERNICUS, GALILEO,
NEWTON AND KEPLER, TO THE PLATFORM OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY. OUR POLICY ON SCIENCE
PLEDGES " PARTICULAR SUPPORT TO AREAS IN
WHICH AUSTRALIA CAN MAKE A SPECIAL CONTRIBUTION,
INCLUDING ASTRONOMY... 
r -4-
IN THE EIGHTEENTH AND NINETEENTH CENTURIES ASTRONOMY WAS
RECOGNISED FOR ITS IMPORTANCE TO NAVIGATION AND
CARTOGRAPHY. IT WAS SUFFICIENTLY IMPORTANT AT THE TIME
OF FEDERATION FOR THE FOUNDING FATHERS TO MAKE SPECIFIC
PROVISION IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION FOR THE PARLIAMENT
TO MAKE LAWS WITH RESPECT TO ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS
TWO SUCH LAWS HAVE BEEN MADE: IN 1930, WHEN PARLIAMENT
ESTABLISHED THE COMMONWEALTH SOLAR OBSERVATORY, AND
IN 1970 WHEN IT PASSED LEGISLATION SETTING UP THE AGREEMENT
FOR THIS TELESCOPE AT SIDING SPRING. IT IS APPROPRIATE
THAT THE STUDY OF THE LAWS OF THE PLANETS AND STARS SHOULD*
BE MENTIONED IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONSTITUTION A DOCUMENT AS
TIMELESS. AND IMMUTABLE AS THE HEAVENLY BODIES THEMSELVES.
THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN COMMITMENT TO ASTRONOMY
IS EXTENSIVE. THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSI-TY OPERATES
MAJOR OPTICAL TELESCOPES AT MOUNT STROMbLO AND HERE AT
SIDING SPRING. MAJOR RADIO TELESCOPES ARE OPERATED BY THE
C. S. I. R. 0. AND BY SYDNEY UNIVERSITY. THE UNIVERSITY OF
TASMANIA HAS A GROWING INVOLVEMENT IN ASTRONOMY AND THERE
ARE STATE GOVERNMENT OBSERVATORIES IN SYDNEY AND PERTH.
THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY ASTRONOMERS HAVE GAINED
A WORLD-WIDE REPUTATION FOR THEIR WORK ON THE STRUCTURE AND
EVOLUTION OF GALAXIES, STELLAR STRUCTURE AND THE CHEMICAL
COMPOSITION OF STARS. RADIO ASTRONOMERS IN C. S. I. R. 0. AND
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY HAVE MADE IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTIONS TO
QUASAR ASTRONOMY AND TO THE STUDY OF THE STRUCTURE AND
EVOLUTION OF THE. UNIVERSE. 
GROUPS WORKING WITH THE PARKES RADIO TELESCOPE HAVE
RECENTLY DISCOVERED MANY DIFFERENT SPECIES OF ORGANIC
MOLECULES IN THE GAS CLOUDS OF INTERSTELLAR* SPACE. THESE
DISCOVERIES MAY THROW LIGHT ON THE PROCESSES THAT LED TO
THE EXISTENCE OF LIFE ON EARTH. ASTRONOMERS AT SYDNEY
UNIVERSITY HAVE PERFORMED WORK OF FUNDAMENTAL SIGNIFICANCE
IN THE MEASUREMENT OF THE SIZES OF STELLAR OBJECTS.
THE BUDGET LAST MONTH PROVIDED A GRANT TO ENABLE A STUDY
OF A NEW INSIRUMENT TO EXTEND THIS WORKS
ASTRONOMY FOR MANY YEARS HAS ENJOYED A WIDE MEASURE
OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION BOTH AT THE INSTITUTIONAL
AND THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL AND AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMY HAS
BENEFITED FROM THIS. AUSTRALIA AND BRITAIN ARE SHARING
EQUALLY THE CAPITAL COST OF THIS TELESCOPE, AMOUNTING TO
$ 16 MI. LLION AND THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL OPERATING COST OF
$ 1.3 MILLION. MANY OF THE ASTRONOMICAL FACILITIES IN
AUSTRALIA WERE-BUILT WITH FUNDS CONTRIBUTED PARTLY FROM
ABROAD AND Vt4NY OF THE ASTRONOMERS WORKING IN AUSTRALIA
WERE BORN OVERSEAS. SOME ARE HERE AS VI'ITORS AND SOME
ARE'PERMANENT RESIDENTS. THEY CONE FROi' A VARIETY OF
-OUNTRIES INCLUDING SRI LANKA, INDIA, KOREA, THE PEOPLE'S
REPUbL-C OF CHINA, ISRAEL, POLAND, THE UNITED KINGDOM,
GERMANY, ' FW ZEALAND AND SWEDEN. THE DIRECTOR
OF THIS TELESCOPE, DR E. J. WAMPLER, ! S AN AMERTCAN CITIZEN
AND TWO OF THE THREE AUSTRALIAN MEMBERS ON THE AAT BOARD,
DR WILD AND PROFESSOR STREET, WERE BORN IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
THERE ARE MANY AUSTRALIAN ASTRONOMERS WORKING OVERSEAS. 
I AM. PROUD TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE INAUGURATION
OF THIS TELESCOPE.. I AM PROUD THAT MY GOVERNMENT, IS
CONTRIBUTING TO ITS COST.. ITS BEAUTY, ITS POWER, ITS
PRECISION REFLECT THE HIGHEST CREDIT ON ALL'WHO DESIGNED
AND BUILT IT. THOSE WHO USE IT, LIKE POLITICANS, WILL
SIT THROUGH THE LONG REACHES OF THE NIGHT. YOU WILL
CONTRIBUTE TO MAN'S UNDERSTANDING OF THE EARTH AND THE
UNIVERSE. THE QUESTIONS YOU ASK ARE OF'TRANSCENDENTAL
IMPORTANCE TO OUR KNOWLEDGE OF OURSELVES AND OUR SURROUNDINGS.
IT MAY WELL BE THAT THE ULTIMATE ANSWERS YOU SEEK WILL
ALWAYS ELUDE YOU; THAT IN THE LAST RESORT THE MYSTERIES YOU
ATTEMPT TO UNRAVEL WILL REMAIN IN THE PHILOSOPHER'S COURT.
FOR ALL THAT, IT IS GOOD TO REFLECT THAT HERE IN THIS
BUILDING AND IN OTHERS LIKE IT, AMONG YOU AND YOUR
COLLEAGUES, SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN ITS PUREST, MOST
PEACEFUL AND MOST DISINTERESTED FORM WILL GO FORWARD FOR
THE ENRICHMENT OF OUR UNDERSTANDING AND FOR THE BENEFIT
OF FUTURE GENERATIONS.
4' 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SALARIED
AND PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS, CANBERRA, MONDAY 21 OCTOBER
1974
MY MEETING WITH ACSPA TODAY IS PART OF A CONTINUING PROGRAM
OF VISITS BY MINISTERS AND LABOR MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT TO TRADE
UNION FORUMS&gt;, WITH MY COLLEAGUES I WELCOME EVERY OPPORTUNITY TO
TELL UNIONISTS, EMPLOYEES, WORKERS OF ALL KINDS WHITE COLLAR,
BLUE COLLAR, MEN AND WOMEN ABOUT THE GOVERNMENT'S ACHIEVEMENTS,
ITS PLANS, AND ITS PROBLEMSY WE ARE READY TO DISCUSS FRANKLY
WITH YOU THE ECONOMIC QUESTIONS THAT FACE US AND FACE THE
GOVERNMENTS OF MOST OTHER COMPARABLE COUNTRIES5
AND SENATOR WRIEDT HAVE SPOKEN ABOUT THE BUDGET TO THE TRADES
AND LABOR COUNCILS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIAV SIMILAR
VISITS BY MINISTERS ARE BEING MADE TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND
VICTORIAN COUNCILSx AFTER DISCUSSIONS WITH EMPLOYEE
JF3ANISATIONS WE HAVE AGREED THAT MINISTERS WILL ATTEND A
VARI-TY OF'UNION CONFERENCES, TRADES AND LABOR COUNCIL MEETINGS,
FEDERAL STATE EXECUTIVE MEETINGS AND GATHERINGS OF RANK AND
FILE UNION MEMSERSX A HOPE-YOU WILL REGARD MY VISIT TODAY
PLEASURABLE AS IT IS FOR ITS OWN SAKE AS PART OF A BROAD
PROCESS OF DISCUSSION AND CONSULTATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
AND THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENTA 
-2-
SUCH A PROCESS IS VALUABLE TO BOTH OF USX I DOUBT IF
ANY PRIME MINISTER, HOWEVER ELSE HE MAY BE CRITICISED FOR THE
WAY HE SPENDS HIS TIME, GIVES MORE OF IT TO PUBLIC SPEAKING,
TO PRESS CONFERENCES, TO EXPLAINING AND CLARIFYING, I HOPE WITH
SOME SUCCESS, THE POLICIES AND PHILOSOPHIES OF THE GOVERNMENTX
THE SAME IS TRUE OF MY SENIOR MINISTERSX WE ARE COMMITTED TO
OPEN GOVERNMENT, BUT WE RECOGNISE THAT THE SUCCESS OF OUR
POLICIES DEPENDS ON THE FULLEST UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT WE ARE
DOING. JUST AS IMPORTANT, WE NEED THE VIEWS, THE ADVICE, THE
OPINIONS OF UNIONS AND EMPLOYEES AND THEIR ORGANISATIONS)
WE HAVE YOUR INTERESTS AT HEART AND WE HAVE GREAT INTERESTS
IN COMMONX OUR OBJECTIVES WILL BE ACHIEVED ONLY WITH THE
FULL CO-OPERATION AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT-
LET ME AT ONCE ACKNOWLEDGE THE VALUABLE SUPPORT THAT MANY WHITE
COLLAR UNIONS'GAVE THE GOVERNMENT AT THE LAST ELECTIONSX FOR
THE FIRST TIME THEY GAVE OPEN SUPPORT TO A POLITICAL PARTY
THE A. L. Px I HAVE GREAT RESPECT FOR YOUR JUDGMENT AND GOOD
SENSE IN THESE MATTER.
-3-
BEFORE THE ELECTIONS I TOLD THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
FRANKLY THAT WE FACED SEVERE ECONOMIC PROBLEMSK I HAVE
NEVER CONCEALED FROM THE PEOPLE THE NATURE OF THOSE PROBLEMS
OR THE NEED FOR TOUGH MEASURES TO DEAL WITH THEMK IT IS TOO
EARLY TO RELAX OUR EFFORTS. IN THE COMING YEAR WE WILL NEED
e ALL THE VIGILANCE AND DETERMINATION WE CAN SUMMON TO OVERCOME
THOSE PROBLEMS,) WE WILL NEED A GOVERNMENT THAT IS STRONG,
RESOURCEFUL AND HUMANE
GOODWILL OF ALL SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, AND ESPECIALLY
OUR OWN SUPPORTERS, THE WORKING PEOPLE WHOSE INTERESTS AND
WELFARE WE HAVE AT HEART: ONLY A LABOR GOVERNMENT A GOVERNMENT
TWICE ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE, A GOVERNMENT THAT POSSESSES THE
DEMONSTRATED CONFIDENCE OF THE PEOPLE, A GOVERNMENT THAT PUTS
THE WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE ABOVE VESTED INTERESTS AND SECTIONAL
GROUPS CAN LEAD THIS COUNTRY THROUGH A PERIOD OF ECONOMIC
DIFFICULTY THAT AFFLICTS ALL THE WORLD'S DEVELOPED INDUSTRIAL
NATIONS( 
JUST AS WE HAVE NEVER CONCEALED THE PROBLEMS, SO WE
HAVE NEVER EXAGGERATED OR DISTORTED THEMK I HAVE FULL
CONFIDENCE IN THE BASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMYK WE HAVE
ONLY TO REMEMBER THE FOUNDATIONS OF THAT STRENGTH RICH
NATURAL RESOURCES, VIGOROUS TRADE, HEALTHY OVERSEAS RESERVES,
A MATURE AND INDUSTRIOUS PEOPLE, A SECURE DEMOCRACY.,-IT IS
TRUE THAT ALL THESE ASSETS CAN BE DEPLETED OR SQUANDERED OR ABUSEDOUR
OPPONENTS AT DIFFERENT TIMES AND IN DIFFERENT WAYS HAVE DONE
JUST THAT. K MY GOVERNMENT WILL PRESERVE AND SAFEGUARD THESE BASIC
ASSETS.
RESOURCES FROM FOREIGN EXPLOITATION?( WE ARE' GIVING BETTER AND
BRIGHTER OPPORTUNITIES TO OUR PEOPLE FOR HEALTH, EDUCATION
AND SOCIAL SECURITYe, WE ARE RESISTING THE ATTACKS ON DEMOCRACY
AND IN THE LAST WEEK OR SO YOU HAVE HEARD THESE THREATS'
RAISED YET AGAIN BY RUTHLESS AND EMBITTERED SENATORS AND
AN OPPOSITION DETERMINED TO RUSTRATE THE PECF'.-' S WL..,
SO I REJECT THE HYSTERIA AND DESPAIR OF THE OPFOSIT! ON,,
I ACKNOWLEDGE THE .: FRIOUSNESS OF OUR PROLEMS. AND T4-NEED
S. TESTING AND DIFFICULT SOLUTIONS, UNLIKE OUR OPPO-NTS.
I ,. IEVE OUR PROBLEMS CAN BE LICKED AND WIL: BE LICKEDe
YOU u, HAVE FROM ME OR ANY OF MY MINISTERS A MESSAGE OF
PESSIMISM OR -EFEATK YOU WON T GET PANIC TALK OR DOUB31E TLk,,
YOU'LL GET REALISM, HONic-vAND WHENEVER ACTION IS N EDED,
YOU'LL GET PROM" F AND POSITIVE ACT. Y" K
AS EMPLOYEES THE ISSUE THAT PARTICULARLY CONCERNS YOU IS
UNEMPLOYMENT) THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES YOUR CONCERN AND SHARES
YOUR CONCERN, ON THIS ISSUE I GIVE YOU THREE FIRM AND UNEQUIVOCAL
ASSURANCESK FIRST, WE ADHERE FIRMLY TO OUR GOAL OF FULL EMPLOYMENT
A JOB FOR EVERY AUSTRALIAN MAN'AND WOMAN WHO IS ABLE AND WILLING
TO WORK-SECONDLY, AND FLOWING FROM THAT GOAL, WE WILL NEVER
RESORT TO THE DELIBERATE CREATION OF MASS UNEMPLOYMENT AS A
MEANS OF CHECKING INFLATIONk-THIRDLY, IF UNEMPLYMENT DOES OCCUR
IN THE COMMUNITY DESPITE OUT EFFORTS AND INTENTIONS WE STAND
READY TO CUSHION ITS EFFECTS, TO PROTECT THOSE AFFECTED, TO CARE
FOR THEM AND THEIR FAMILIES, TO ASSIST THEM IN FINDING NEW JOBS
AND IF NECESSARY TRAIN THEM IN NEW JOBSv SO THERE YOU HAVE A
THREE-FOLD COMMITMENT TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THIS COUNTRY 
-6-
WHEN EMPLOYEES ARE TEMPTED TO ASK, " WOULD UNEMPLOYMENT
BE LESS UNDER THE LIBERALS?" JUST REMEMBER WHAT HAPPENED WHEN
THE LIBERALS WERE IN POWERY UNEMPLOYMENT WAS THEIR PRIME
WEAPON, THEIR CHOSEN INSTRUMENT FOR CHECKING INFLATION AND
INTIMIDATING THE UNION MOVEMENTA. IT WAS THE ONLY WEAPON THEY
UNDERSTOODX THEY CALCULATED THAT THE VICTIMS OF UNEMPLOYMENT
WERE MOST LIKELY TO BE LABOR VOTERS WHO HAD NEVER SUPPORTED A
LIBERAL GOVERNMENT AND WERE THEREFORE UNABLE TO WITHDRAW THEIR
SUPPORTK THEY MADE lEi CALLOUS AND CYNICAL ASSUMPTION THAT
UNEMPLOYMENT WOULDN'T HURT THEMK THEY WERE WRONG IN 1961 AND
THEY WERE WRONG IN 1972k YET THAT WAS THEIR ASSUMPTION ON
EVERY OCCASION WHEN SIGNS OF INFLATION APPEARED THEY ACCEPTED
WITHOUT QUESTION OR HESITATION THE ADVICE THAT MEN BE PUT OUT
OF WORKK YET THE LIBERALS WERE TOTALLY INDIFFERENT TO THE
EFFECTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT ON THE WORKING MAN AND HIS FAMILY AND
ON THE WHOLE-COMMUNITY5 THEY HAD NO PLANS TO ALLEV! ATE UNEMPLOYMENT,
TO PROTECT ITS VICTIMS, TO CREATE NEW JOB OPPr! Ti) NTUN" T-! T'T EJ. UI!
MEN FOR OTHER WORK. WHEN YOU HEAR THE PIOUS CRIES O THE nPPOSITION
ABOUT UNEMPLOYMEi,' TODAY REMEMBER rHOM'U CH WORSE iT :' OULD 3E IF
THEY WERE IN POWER, HOW OFTEN THEY CREA'TD DELIBERATE UNEMPLOVMENT
THElELVES, AND HOW UTTERLY INSENSITIVE THEY ': iRE TC THE PLIGHT
OF IT " TrTIMS. 
-7-
IN OUR ECONOMIC POLICIES WE HAVE SHOWN OURSELVES READY
TO TAKE ANY ACTION NEEDED TO MAINTAIN EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIESA
AS THE TREASURER SAID WHEN PRESENTING THE BUDGET: " SHOULD THE
NEED ARISE WE STAND READY DURING THE YEAR TO TAKE ACTION ON THE
EXPENDITURE OR REVENUE SIDE OF THE BUDGET TO GIVE A QUICK
STIMULUS TO DEMAND AND EMPLOYMENTk I E HAVE ALREADY DONE SO.
WE HAVE GIVEN EVIDENCE OF THIS READINESSk
THE DEYALUATION OF 25 SEPTEMBER WAS INTENDED TO GIVE
A BOOST TO GENERAL BUSINESS CONFIDENCE AND STIMULATE THE ECONOMYV
OUR GRADUAL EASING OF CREDIT, OUR MEASURES TO BOOST HOUSE
BUILDING, OUR SELECTIVE RESPONSE TO DIFFICULTIES IN THE FOOTWEAR
INDUSTRY ARE ALL EXAMPLES OF FLEXIBLE GOVERNMENT ACTION WITHIN
THE CONTEXT OF AN OVERALL POLICY TO RESTRAIN THE RE-EMERGENCE
OF SPENDINGk THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME IS
DESIGNED TO IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN CERTAIN AREAS
BY ENCOURAGING LOCAL INITIATIVES AND ENLISTING THE SUPPORT OF
RELEVANT LOCAL AUTHORITIES3, THE NATIONAL EMPLOYMENT AND
TRAINING SYSTEM IS PROVIDING COMPREHENSIVE JOB TRAINING AND
RETRAINING SCHEMES FOR THOSE AFFECTED BY TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
OR GOVERNMENT POLICIESK NOTHING OF THIS SORT WAS EVEN CONTEMPLATED
BY OUR PREDECESSORS, DESPITE A CLEAR NEED FOR ITX MANPOWER
POLICIES ARE NOT SOMETHING NEEDED MERELY TO RELIEVE UNEMPLOYMENT*
THEY ARE BASIC TO THE CREATION OF A MORE MODERN, EFFICIENT AND
RESILIENT INDUSTRIAL ECONOMYX 
OUR MEASURES CANNOT CURE OUR PROBLEM OVERNIGHT,. IT
WILL TAKE TIME FOR THEIR EFFECTS TO BECOME APPARENT+ PITH
EVERY ECONOMIC DECISION'THERE IS A LAG BETWEEN IMPLEMENTATION,
AND RESULTSk THAT IS WHY I APPEAL TO YOU FOR UNDERSTANDING
AND CO-OPERATIONk REMEMBER THAT NO COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS
FOUND A QUICK, EASY SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF MAINTAINING
PROSPERITY WITH FULL EMPLOYMENT AND A LOW LEVEL OF
WE ARE DOING AS WELL AS MANY COUNTRIES IN COPING WITH INFLATION
AND BETTER THAN ANY OTHER COUNTRY IN MAINTAINING EMPLOYMENT. I
DON'T WANT YOU TO THINK WE ARE COMPLACENT ON THAT SCORE PIE
DON'T REGARD-ANY INCREASE IN UNEMPLOYMENT AS ACCEPTABLE FOR A
MOMENTA ONE MAN NEEDLESSLY UNEMPLOYED IS ONE MAN TOO MANYk LAST
YEAR WE CLEANED UP THE MESS OF LIBERAL UNEMPLOYMENT. ' E ARE
STILL COPING . WITH THE INFLATIONARY PRESSURES THEY LEFT BEHINDX
IN THEIR LAST YEAR OF OFFICE THEY SCATTERED THE SEEDS OF INFLATION
FAR AND WIDE OVERHEATING THE ECONOMY, FLOODING US WITH HOT
MONEY IN A DESPERATE ATTEMPT TO BUT OFF ELECTORAL DEFEATX 
-9-
TODAY THE FIGURES FOR THE SEPTEMBER CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX WERE RELEASED THEY SHOW AN INCREASE IN THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER OF 5.4% k SUCH A DISTURBINGLY HIGH RATE OF INFLATION
CANNOT CONTINUE WITHOUT PERMANENT DAMAGE TO OUR ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE THERE SHOULD BE NO DOUBT THAT THIS
SEVERE INFLATION WILL CONTINUE IF THERE ARE EXCESSIVE WAGE
CLAIMSk IT IS IN THE INTERESTS OF ALL WORKERS TO RElfRAIN
FROM MAKING UNREASONABLE WAGE DEMANDS, BECAUSE LET ME BE
FRANK, INFLATION COSTS JOBS. INDUSTRIES WHICH MUST COMPETE
WITH IMPORTS WILL BE PRICED OUT OF THE MARKET AND ALL INDUSTRIES
CANNOT PLAN AND INVEST FOR THE FUTURE IN THE UNCERTAIN CLIMATE
WHICH ACCOMPANIES INFLATION OF THIS MAGNITUDEk
THE GOVERNMENT HAS SHOWN THROUGH ITS TAXATION
POLICIES; ITS EXPENDITURE POLICIES AND ITS LEG VLATION ON
PRICES JUSTIFICATION AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES THAT IT
EXPECTS THE PRINCIPAL BURDEN OF RESTRAINT TO FALL ON THOSE
BEST ABLE TO THE LOAD, THAT RESTRAINT IS ALREADY IN
EFFECT AND WE NOW EXPECT THE LABOR MOVEMENT IN ITS IND! JSTRIAL
ING TO RESPOND TO THE GOVERNMENT S CALL aW COOPERATE IN; A
" TY WIDE EFFORT TO STOP INFLATIONk 
As THE TREASURER STATED IN HIS BUDGET SPEECH,
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN EXPLORING A TAX PENALTY MECHANISM
BY WHICH WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES BEYOND AN ESTABLISHED
NORM MIGHT BE EXCLUDED FROM ASSESSABLE COSTS FOR THE
ASSESSMENT OF COMPANY INCOME TAX. I HAVE RELEASED TODAY
A COPY OF A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY
THE CABINET TO INVESTIGATE THIS MATTERA SUCH A TAX WOULD
CREATE ANOMALIES AND DISTORT MANY ECONOMIC PROCESSES THE
GOVERNMENT WOULD PREFER NOT TO BE FORCED INTO INTRODUCING
SUCH A MEASURE EVEN ON A TEMPORARY BASISA HOWEVER, IF WAGE
SETTLEMENTS CONTINUE AT THE RATE THEY HAVE* IN RECENT MONTHS,
THEN WE HAVE TO FACE THE FACT THAT WHAT IS NOW MERELY AN
OPTION MAY BECOME AN OBLIGATION.
THE PRICE INCREASES REFLECTED IN THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER FIGURES ARE A REFLECTION OF WAGE INCREASES SOME
MONTHS* AGOV THERE IS STILL A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF COST INFLATION
IN THE ECONOMIC PIPELINEX WAGE CLAIMS IN THE COMING MONTHS
WILL DETERMINE WHETHER THE RATE OF INFLATION WILL BE REDUCEDx.
WE LOOK TO THE COOPERATION OF EMPLOYEES AND THEIR
ORGANISATION IN THIS OBJECTIVEA WE DO SO WITHOUT ATTEMPTING TO
ALLOCATE BLAME FOR THAT IS A FRUITLESS EXERCI-SE5( THE QUESTION
OF WHAT COMES FIRST, WAGE INCREASES OR PRICE INCREASES IS A
CHICKEN AND EGG QUESTIONA WHAT WE MUST DO ISTO BREAK THE
SPIRAL OF INTERACTION BETWEEN WAGES AND PRICESA THE GOVERNMENT
HAS SET THE PRE-CONDITIONS, WITHIN THE LIMITS* OF ITS OWN
CONSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY, FOR A COMMUNITY EFFORT TO BREAK
THAT SPIRAL, WE MUST NOW PROCEED TO DO SO 
i
WE SHALL PRESS FORWARD WITH OUR PROGRAMl IF THERE IS
ONE THING OUR OPPONENTS WOULD LIKE TO SEE IT IS THE ABANDONMENT
OF OUR PROGRAMX IT IS OUR PROGRAM, ABOVE ALL, THAT GIVES MEANING
AND PURPOSE TO THE LABOR GOVERNMENT AND EXPOSES THE COMPLACENCY
AND EMPTINESS OF THE OPPOSITION, WE DON'T ADHERE TO OUR PROGRAM
OUT OF STUBBORNNESS OR SENTIMENTX WE DON'T REGARD IT FOR A
MOMENT AS INCOMPATIBLE WITH A DETERMINED AND RESOURCEFUL
ANTI-INFLATIONARY PROGRAM FAR FROM BEING HOSTILE TO OUR
ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICIES, OUR PROGRAM IS INTEGRAL TO THEM,
AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE BATTLE TO RESTRAIN INFLATION, TO REMOVE
ITS CAUSES AND PROTECT ITS VICTIMSk YOU, . MR PRESIDENT, HAVE BEEN
GOOD ENOUGH TO ACKNOWLEDGE IN YOUR ADDRESS THE MANY ACHIEVEMENTS
IN THE GOVERNMENT'S RECORD TO DATEk I TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THEM
BUT WHAT IS THE POINT OF THEM? WHAT IS THE POINT OF BETTER
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES, BETTER HEALTH SERVICES, BETTER SOCIAL
SECURITY, BETTER CHILD CARE, BETTER CITIES, BETTER TRANSPORT,
BETTER ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS, BETTER MANPOWER POLICIES, BETTER
AND MORE EFFICIENT METHODS OF ASSISTING OUR RURAL AND MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES? 
12
CLEARLY ALL THESE ARE GOOD THINGS IN THEMSELVES XTHEY
ARE DESIRABLE FOR THEIR OWN SAKE5TOGETHER, HOWEVER, THEY HELP
CREATE A MORE EFFICIENT, MORE RATIONAL, MORE ORDERLY SOCIETY.
THEY RAISE OUR STANDARD OF LIVING OUR CHANCES OF ENJOYING LIFE
IN WAYS THAT ARE QUITE INDEPENDENT OF OUR INDIVIDUAL INCOMES,
INDEED IN WAYS THAT INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE INCOMES, HOWEVER GREAT
THEY MAY BE, CANNOT OF THEMSELVES ACHIEVEk THEY HELP REDUCE WASTE
AND CUT DOWN COSTS,( THEY HELP SOCIETY MAKE THE MOST OF ITS
AVAILABLE TALENTS AND RESOURCESX THESE THINGS, THEN, ARE PART
OF A TRUE ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICY BECAUSE THEY GO TO THE ROOTS
OF OUR DIFFICULTIES NO COUNTRY, BECAUSE OF THE REALITIES OF
WORLD TRADE AND CURRENCY MOVEMENTS, CAN ESCAPE INFLATION ALTOGETHER
IF, HOWEVER, WE LOOK AT THE COUNTRIES WHERE INFLATION IS LOWEST,
WE FIND THEY ARE THOSE WITH THE HIGHEST DEGREE OF INDUSTRIAL
EFFICIENCY, THE HIGHEST DEGREE OF SOCIAL SECURITY, THE MOST MODERN
INSTITUTIONS, WHERE EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS AND OTHER SERVICES ARE
NOT BLIGHTED BY CLASS DISTINCTION, SOCIAL UNREST OR GROSS
INEQUALITIES OF INCOMEX a/ 13 
13
I DO NOT WANT TO OVERSIMPLIFY THIS PROBLEM UNLIKE
MR SNEDDEN I CANNOT CLAIM TO HAVE A MAGIC CURES I SUGGEST, HOWEVER,
THAT IN THE LONG RUN THERE ARE TWO WAYS OF APPROACHING THE PROBLEM
OF INFLATIONX ONE IS TO BLUDGEON THE ECONOMY INTO SUBMISSION;
TAKE IT OUT ON THE WORKERS THAT IS THE LIBERAL APPROACHV THE
OTHER IS TO REFORM THE BASIC INSTITUTIONS OF A MIXED ECONOMY, TO
MAKE OUR FACTORIES AND SERVICES MORE MODERN AND EFFICIENT, OUR ROADS
AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS MORE UP-TO-DATE AND BETTER CO-ORDINATED, TO
IMPROVE OUR EDUCATIONAL SERVICES FROM PRE-SCHOOLS TO TECHNICAL
COLLEGES TO UNIVERSITIES, TO MAKE OUR CITI-ES LESS CONGESTED AND
POLLUTED, TO ENSURE FAIR AND HEALTHY COMPETITION IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR, TO CUT OUT WASTEFUL RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES AND PROTECT THE
CONSUMER, TO REMOVE THE CAUSES OF FEAR AND INSECURITY AND NEEDLESS
INDUSTRIAL UNREST BY GIVING EMPLOYEES A FAIR SHARE OF THE NATION'S
PROSPERITY' THAT IS OUR APPROACHK THAT IS WHAT OUR POLICIES
AIM TO DOK THEY ARE NOT JUST A COLLECTION OF ATTRACTIVE PARTSy
THEIR UNIFYING AND CONSISTENT PRINCIPLE IS SOCIAL REFORM AND
REGENERATION ,/ 14 
11-
OUR PROGRAM IS RAISING THE LIVING STANDARDS AND THE
SECURITY OF EVERY AUSTRALIAN..
TO THE WORKERS'I WELFARE AS HIS AGITATION FOR MORE PAYK
THE BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 ANNOUNCED AN EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION
OF $ 1,535 MILLION, AN INCREASE OF 78 PER CENT ON THE PREVIOUS
YEARtC, WE ARE SPENDING SEVEN TIMES MORE THAN OUR PREDECESSORS
ON SCHOOLS AND FOUR TIMES MORE ON THE WHOLE FIELD OF EDUCATION
HEALTH EXPENDITURE ROSE By 21 PER CENT IN-1973/ 74 AND WILL RISE
BY 30 PER CENT THIS YEARK OUR EXPENDITURE ON SOCIAL SECURITY
AND lWE.-LFARErc AMOUNTS TO NEARLY A QUARTER OF BUDGET OUTLAYS AND
iS EXPECTED FO REACH $ 3,441 MILLION THIS YEAR, AN INCREASE OF
38.3 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR,
REACH A RECORD $ 1401 MILLION THIS YEAR, COMPARED WITH $ 77 MILLION
SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN THEIR LAST YEAR OF OFF ICE#'
EXPENDITURE ON URBAN IMPROVEMENTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT WILL
AL. MOST REACH $ 1400 MILLION, A THREE-FOLD INCREASE ON LAST YEAR
AND EIGHT TIMES THE AMOUNT SPENT BY OUR PREDECESSORS IN 1972/ 73
WE HAVE ALSO TAKEN IMPORTANT STEPS IN IMPROVING PUBLIC TRANSPORT,
WATER SUPPLY AND ELECTRICITY, RETRAINING, REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT
AND IN NATIONAL COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION SCHEMESo( 
I DO NOT MEAN BY THIS THAT HIGHER WAGES ARE UNIMPORTANT,
REAL PURCHASING POWER FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF AUSTRALIANS HAS
IMPROVED UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT AND WILL CONTINUE TO DO SOK
TO THE EXTENT THAT HIGHER INCOMES REPRESENT A REAL GAIN IN
LIVING STANDARDS WE WELCOME EVERY ADVANCE THAT EMPLOYEES CAN
ACHIEVE,( WHAT IS FUTILE, AND WHAT WE MUST CURTAIL, IS THE
EXCESSIVE AND SELF-DEFEATING ESCALATION OF MONEY INCOMES THAT
BRINGS NO IMPROVEMENT IN LIVING STANDARDSX THIS IS WHAT WE
MEAN BY WAGE RESTRAINTA( NATURALLY, WHILE INFLATION PERSISTS
AS A RESULT OF PAST LIBERAL NEGLECT AND IRRESPONSIBILITY AS
WELL AS THE EFFECTS OF WORLDWIDE INFLATION,. WE WANT TO ENSURE
THAT EMPLOYEES' WAGES ARE ADJUSTED ACCORDINGLY,( THE CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION WILL NOW DECIDE THE MATTER OF WAGE
INDEXATIONK ( MAY I SAY IN PASSING THAT WE TAKE GREAT
SATISFACTION, AS YOU MUST DO, FROM THE APPOINTMENT OF MR.
BARNEY WILLIAMS, THE SECRETARY OF ACSPA, AS A DEPUTY PRESIDENT
OF THE COMMISSIONX) 
-16-
THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECLARED ITS SUPPORT FOR QUARTERLY
., COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENTS IN THE BELIEF THAT THEY WILL HELP
RESTRAIN A WORTHLESS GROWTH IN MONEY WAGESWITHOUT DEPRIVING
EMPLOYEES OF THE PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT OF REAL EARNINGS MADE
POSSIBLE BY RISING PRODUCTIVITYX WE AGREE WITH ACSPA THAT WAGE
INDEXATION ON ITS OWN CAN NEVER BE SUFFICIENT AS A TOTAL WAGES
POLICY OR AS A GOAL FOR THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT5 WE SEE IT
SOLELY AS A COUNTER TO THE EFFECTS OF INFLATIONARY PRESSURES ON
INCOMES; WE DO NOT SEE IT AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE BROADER AND
MORE FUNDAMENTAL REVIEW OF WAGES AND SALARIES BASED ON WORK
VALUES, CHANGING CONDITIONS OR PRODUCTIVITYk FOR THAT REASON
WE DO NOT INTEND TO APPLY A PERCENTAGE INDEX TO ALL WAGES AND
SALARIESK WE WILL DO THAT FOR LOWER PAID WORKERS AND MAKE A
FLAT INCREASE FOR THOSE RECEIVING MORE THAN AVERAGE WEEKLY
EARNINGS. IN THIS, QUITE FRANKLY, WE DIFFER FROM THE POLICY OF
ACSPA, WHICH FAVOURS A PERCENTAGE ADJUSTMENT FOR ALL WORKERSX
BECAUSE THE PRINCIPLE AT ISSUE IS IMPORTANT TO BOTH OF US I
SHALL TRY TO EXPLAIN TO YOU WHY WE BELIEVE OUR APPROACH IS THE
FAIRESTI IN THE FIRST PLACE IT CONFORMS WITH ALL HISTORICAL
PRECEDENTSX WHEN QUARTERLY COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENTS WERE MADE
IN THE PAST, THE INDEX APPLIED ONLY TO THE BASIC WAGE COMPONENT
OF A WORKER'S PAY, NEVER TO HIS MARGIN, PERCENTAGE RISES ACROSS
THE BOARD WERE NEVER MADE, AND IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT WHEN
EMPLOYEE ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING ACSPA 5' CsSOUGHT RESTORATION
OF CO( ST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENTS IN THE MID-" ft IT WAS THE FLAT
RATE INCREASE WHICH THEY SUPPORTED 
PART OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IS TO
REDISTRIBUTE INCOMES IN FAVOUR OF THE LEAST FORTUNATE AND LOWEST
PAID MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITYW THIS HAS BEEN A CONSISTENT
l THEME OF THE GOVERNMENT'S POLICIESX WE RAISED THE BASIC PENSION
LAST AUGUST BY $ 5 A WEEKX IT WAS THE BIGGEST SINGLE INCREASE EVER.
MADE IN THE PENSION 1E RESTRUCTURED TAX SCALES IN THE BUDGET
IN FAVOUR OF LOWER AND MIDDLE INCOME EARNERSX AS A RESULT, THE
MAJORITY OF LOWER PAID AUSTRALIANS WILL PAY LESS TAXy OUR HOME
MORTGAGE INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY SCHEME WILL BENEFIT THE LOWER
PAID WORKER MORE THAN THOSE ON HIGHER PAYj IN THESE SITUATIONS,
TO GIVE THE SAME BENEFITS TO EVERYONE IS NOT TO" TREAT ALL PEOPLE.
EQUALLY BUT TO TREAT THE FORTUNATE MORE GENEROUSLY THAN THE RESTk
CONVERSELY, IF WE TRULY BELIEVE IN SOCIAL EQUALITY WE MUST TREAT
THE POOR A GOOD DEAL BETTER THAN THE RESTx THE DEPRIVED IN OUR
SOCIETY ARE NOT DEPRIVED MERELY BY COMPARISON WITH SPECULATORS,
STOCKBROKERS AND BUSINESSMEN4 THEY ARE DEPRIVED BY COMPARISON
WITH OTHER WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS, AND THIS IS A MUCH MORE
IMMEDIATE CAUSE OF THEIR UNRESTX / 18
a 
-18-
IPUT IT TO YOU THAT THE HIGHEST PAID WORKERS IN THE
COMMUNITY HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE WELFARE OF THEIR
LESS FORTUNATE FELLOWS. OUR POLICY ON INDEXATION, LIKE
OUR CAPITAL GAINS TAX AND OUR SURCHARGE ON UNEARNED INCOME.-
IS AN ATTEMPT TO ESTABLISH GREATER EQUITY IN THE TAXATION
AND INCOME SCALES. EQUITY IS WHAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS ALL
ABOUT. IN FIELDS OTHER THAN WAGES THE GoVERNMEN" T HAS ACTED
WHEREVER POSSIBLE TO RAISE STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS OFEMPLOYEES.
FOR THOSE OF YOUR MEMBERS IN THE AUSTRALIAN
PUBLIC SERVICE WE HAVE INTRODUCED A WHOLE RANGE OF NEW
BENEFITS WHICH IN TIME.-WE BELIEVE, WILL* BENEFIT EVERYONE#
WE INTRODUCED FOUR WEEKS' ANNUAL LEAVE, AN ANNUAL LEAVE
LOADING5o MATERNITY AND PATERNITY LEAVE. WE HAVE * EXTENDED'
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO EMPLOYEES WITH THE SERVICE
AND REDUCED THE QUALIFYING PERIOD FOR LONG-SERVICE LEAVE
FROM 15 TO 10 YEARS. WE HAVE ENCOURAGED MORE FLEXIBLE WORKING.
HOURS, REMOVED AGE LIMITS ON ENTRY AND BANNED DISCRIMINATION
AGAIN'ST WOMEN. WE HAVE LIFTED RESTRICTIONS ON FREE SPEECH
AND ABOLISHED THE BONDING SYSTEM. WE HAVE IMPLEMENTED EQUAL
PAY FOR WOMEN A PRINCIPLE. WE SUPPORTED FOR-ALL WOMEN IN THE
WORK FORCE IN ONE OF THE VERY FIRST ACTIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT, 
-19.
I COMMEND THE BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES OF ACSPA. YOUR
PRE--BUDGET SUBMISSIONS TO THE GOVERNMENT AND YOUR SUBMISSION
TO [ IR JUSTICE MOORE'S CONFERENCE WERE WELCOME AND IMPORTANT
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF CURRENT ECONOMIC ISSUES.
YOU HAVE DONE MUCH TO INVOLVE WHITE COLLAR', WORKERS IN THE REALITIES
OF INDUSTRIAL NEGOTIATION, TO ADVANEC E THEIR WELFARE AND IMPROVE
THE STATUS OF EMPLOYEES OF ALL KINDS, I VALUE THE SUPPORT AND
CO-OPERATION YOU HAVE SHOWN TO THE GOVERNMENT. WHILE I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED, I HOPE THE
CURRENT RENEWED-INITIATIVES TOWARDS THE AFFILIATION OF ACSPA
AND THE ACTU WILL LEAD TO POSITIVE RESULTS. ONE OF THE CONSTANT
OBJECTIVES OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN TO BRING ABOUT
THE AMALGAMATION OF UNIONS INTO MORE VIABLE AND EFFICIENT
GROUPINGS. THIS OBJECTIVE; CENTRAL TO OUR AIM OF GREATER
INDUSTRIAL STABILITY AND HARMONY, HAS BEEN CONSISTENTLY
FRUSTRATED BY OUR OPPONENTS. I BELIEVE THE PRINCIPLE OF
AMALGAMATION APPLIES WITH EQUAL VALIDITY TO UNION COUNCILS
THE CLOSEST POSSIBLE INSTITUTIONAL LINKS BETWEEN WHITE AND
BLUE COLLAR UNIONS WILL HELP BRING US CLOSER TO THE ACHIEVEMENT
OF OUR COMMON GOALS AND THE CREATION OF A MORE JUST AND
PROSPEROUS SOCIETY FOR ALL AUSTRALIANs, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P..
TO THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE MEETING
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, TUESDAY 22 OCTOBER 1974
THANK YOU COUNCILLOR GEMMELL AND THANK YOU
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE FOR
ARRANGING THIS CONFERENCE TONIGHT ON A MATTER WHICH IS OF
CONCERN TO ALL OF US PRESENT.
THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT LEAGUE SINCE ITS
FORMATION IN 1944 HAS PROMOTED THE CONCEPT OF THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INTER-STATE BODY TO COORDINATE THE
BALANCED DEVELOPMENT OF THE RIVER MURRAY AREAS. I UNDERSTAND
THAT MR VERN LAWRENCE, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE LEAGUE.
IN HIS THEN CAPACITY AS ORGANISING SECRETARY. WAS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE 1946 MURRAY VALLEY RESOURCES SURVEY COMMITTEE.
ESTABLISHED BY THE CHIFLEY LABOR GOVERNMENT AND THE
GOVERNMENTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
THE LEAGUE HAS ALWAYS BEEN CONCERNED WITH THE QUALITY OF THE
WATERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY AND ITS TRIBUTARIES AND IT IS
LEA POLICY THAT THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER QUALITY. 
-2-
THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION WAS, AS YOU ARE ALL
AWARE, FORMED NEARLY 60 YEARS AGO WHEN THE RIVER MURRAY
WATERS AGREEMENT WAS MADE. THE AGREEMENT WAS, AS NOTED
BY DR CLARK IN HIS MOST VALUABLE PAPER ON THE ADMINISTRATION
OF INTERSTATE RIVERS, " A PIONEERING AGREEMENT, NOT JUST FOR
AUSTRALIA, BUT FOR OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEMS IN THE COMMON LAW
WORLD", THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT COULD NOT HAVE SIGNED
THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT IN 1914 AND THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT COULD NOT HAVE PASSED THE RIVER
MURRAY WATERS ACT IN 1915 BUT FOR THE FACT THAT THE RIVER
WAS STILL BEING USED AT THAT TIME FOR INTER-STATE
NAVIGATION, A MATTER ON WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT
CAN MAKE LAWS.
THE ORIGINAL AGREEMENT AND ACT ENTAILED A SMALLER
EXPENDITURE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THAN BY EACH
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS. THE LEGISLATION WAS CONCERNED
WITH STORAGE OF THE RIVER'S WATERS AND LOCKS AND WEIRS
FOR NAVIGATION OF THE RIVER.
NOWADAYS THERE IS VIRTUALLY NO'INTERSTATE
NAVIGATION ON THE MURRAY, ACCORDINGLY, THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT NOW HAS VERY TENUOUS, IF ANY, CONSTITUTIONAL
POWERS TO PASS LAWS WITH RESPECT TO THE MURRAY. IN
PARTICULAR, IT CANNOT BY ITSELF PASS LAWS CONCERNING
THE QUALITY OF THE WATERS AND THE USE OF THE REPARIAN
LANDS. / 2A 
-2ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AGREES ENTIRELY
WITH THE VIEW PUT FORWARD BY THE LEAGUE THAT THE
RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE GIVEN RESPONSIBILITIES
FOR WATER QUALITY IN THE RIVER MURRAY. I WOULD GO
EVEN FURTHER AND SAY THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR AN
INTER-STATE BODY TO CO-ORDINATE ALL ASPECTS OF WATER
USE AND MANAGEMENT AND TO TENDER ADVICE TO
GOVERNMENTS ON THE USE AND MANAGEMENT OF RELATED LANDS.
v / 3 
-3-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ALSO AWARE OF THE CONCERN
ON THIS QUESTION THAT HAS BEEN EXPRESSED BY A WIDE RANGE
OF ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS, INCLUDING SOME OF THE
HONOURABLE MEMBERS OF BOTH MAJOR PARTIES PRESENT HERE TONIGHT,
IT WAS THE SAME SORT OF CONCERN THAT THE PREMIEROF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA , MR DUNSTAN, CONVEYED TO ME IN HIS LETTER
ON 19 JANUARY 1973. IN RESPONSE TO THIS LETTER I CONVENED
A MEETING BETWEEN MYSELF AND THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH
', IAL. ES, VICTORIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA ON 2 MARCH 1973 TO
DISCUSS THE RIVER MURRAY AND THE POWERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY
COMMISSION. AT THAT MEETING, ALL PREMIERS EXPRESSED CONCERN
OVER PRESENT AND POTENTIAL WATER QUALITY PROBLEMS IN THE
RIVER AND ALL SAID THAT THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION
SHOULD BE -INCREASED TO COPE WITH THESE PROBLEMS. WE. AGREED
Ar THE MEETING TO ESTABLISH A STEERING COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS
OF THE FOUR GOVERNMENTS TO WHICH A WORKING PARTY OF OFFICERS
IS TO REPORT ON THESE MATTERS.
IN RETROSPECT I BELIEVE THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD
HAVE BEEN GIVEN A DEFINITE COMPLETION DATE; EIGHTEEN MONTHS
AFTERWARDS THE WORKING PARTY APPEARS TO HAVE ACHIEVED LITTLE.
I UNDERSTAND THE WORKING PARTY HAS ESTABLISHED
EXPERT COMMITTEES ON SALINITY, WATER QUALITY, IMPROVEDJ
IRRIGATION PRACTICES AND BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION. LAST YEAR
THE WORKING PARTY SUBMITTED AN INTERIM REPORT TO MINISTERS,
WHICH THEY ENDORSED AND WHICH MADE A NUMBER OF RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING MINOR SALT MITIGATION WORK. A vss/ 
-4-
I UNDERSTAND THAT THE WORKING PARTY'S COMMITTEE DEALING WITH
WATER QUALITY IS LIKELY TO SUBMIT A REPORT BEFORE THE END
OF THE YEAR RECOMMENDING A WATER QUALITY MONITORING
NETWORK FOR THE MURRAY AND COMMENTING ON THE NEED FOR NEW
ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS TO CONTROL WATER QUALITY.
THE WORKING PARTY HAS ADOPTED THE POSITION THAT
IT CANNOT MAKE DEFINITE RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW THE FUNCTIONS
OF THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD BE MODIFIED UNTIL IT
HAS IDENTIFIED THE EXTENT OF THE PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED WITH
THE MURRAY RIVER AND THEIR ROOT CAUSES. I'CERTAINLY DO NOT
ARGUE WITH THE LOGIC OF THIS POSITION; IT IS HOWEVER MY
STRONGLY HELD VIEW THAT THERE IS ALREADY MORE THAN ENOUGH
EVIDENCE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE CURRENT POWERS AND
FUNCTIONS OF THE RMC IN ASSOCIATION WITH STATE GOVERNMENT
POWERS HAVE PROVED TO BE INADEQUATE. THIS EVIDENCE IS
AVAILABLE BOTH IN TERMS OF TECHNICAL DATA AND IN ALMOST
UNANIMOUS EXPRESSIONS OF CONCERN BY THE PEOPLE MOST
INTIMATELY CONNECTED WITH THE RIVER SUCH AS YOURSELVES.
I AM DEEPLY CONCERNED THAT A MATTER IN NEED OF
REFORM IDENTIFIED 18 MONTHS AGO BY MYSELF AND THE PREMIERS
IS TAKING SO LONG TO BE EXAMINED. a. 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS FIRMLY CONVINCED
THAT THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD, IN PARALLEL WITH ITS TECHNICAL
INVESTIGATIONS, BE LOOKING AT THE MOST GENERAL CLAUSES OF
ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE, REQUIRING IT TO EXAMINE THE TYPES
OF MEASURES WHICH NEED TO BE TAKEN TO PROTECT AND IMPROVE
THE QUALITY OF THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AND THE CHANGES WHICH
WOULD BE REQUIRED IN THE RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT TO
ENABLE THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION TO UNDERTAKE SUCH
MEASURES, IN SUMMARY, THE WORKING PARTY SHOULD BE CONSIDERING
NOT WHETHER CHANGES SHOULD BE MADE IN THE RIVER MURRAY
WATERS AGREEMENT, BUT WHAT CHANGES,
THE REALITY OF THE SITUATION IS THAT SALINITY IN
THE MURRAY IS ONE OF AUSTRALIA'S MOST SERIOUS WATER POLLUTION
PROBLEMS, A GREAT DEAL OF MONEY IS TO BE SPENT IN TREATING
ADELAIDE'S WATER SUPPLY, BUT IT MAY SURPRISE MANY PEOPLE
TO LEARN THAT WHILE THIS WILL PROVIDE SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENTS
IN MANY RESPECTS TO THE QUALITY OF ADELAIDE'S WATER IT WILL
HAVE NO EFFECT WHATEVER ON THE SALINITY OF THE WATER BEING
USED BY THE RESIDENTS OF THAT CITY, THIS MOST INTRACTABLE
PROBLEM MUST THEREFORE BE DEALT WITH EITHER BY DIVERSION OF
SALINE WATERS FROM THE MURRAY RIVER, OR BY CHANGES IN LAND
USE AND IRRIGATION PRACTICES, 
-6-
CONFLICTS OVER USE OF WATER IN THE REGION ARE
GOING TO INCREASE AS THE YEARS GO ON. AT THE PROJECTED
RATE OF INCREASE IN DEMAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S POST
DARTMOUTH ENTITLEMENT WILL BE FULLY TAKEN UP BY THE YEAR
2000, TO DATE NO ONE HAS MADE A COMPREHENSIVE, INTEGRATED
EXAMINATION OF THE IMPLICATIONS WHICH DIFFERENT LAND USE
PATTERNS HAVE FOR WATER RESOURCES IN THE VALLEY. TWO OF THE
MOST SIGNIFICANT USES WHICH SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN SUCH AN
EXAMINATION ARE, OF COURSE, IRRIGATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT
OF URBAN GROWTH CENTRES SUCH AS ALBURY-WODONGA. SUCH AN
EXAMINATION MIGHT INDICATE THAT CHANGES IN EXISTING OR
PLANNED LAND USE ARE DESIRABLE IN ORDER TO PROTECT THE
QUALITY OF THE WATERS OF THE MURRAY SO THAT MAXIMUM BENEFICIAL
USE OF THE WATERS IN ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
TERMS CAN BE OBTAINED FOR BOTH THE REGION AND THE NATION
AS A WHOLE. THIS MATTER HAS NOT BEEN INVESTIGATED BY THE
WORKING PARTY. DR CASS PUT IT TO THE MINISTERIAL STEERING
COMMITTEt LAST YEAR BUT THE STATE MINISTERS REJECTED'THE
PROPOSAL. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING LARGE AMOUNTS
OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ALBURYWODONGA
AND MONARTO GROWTH CENTRES. ./ 7 
-7-
IT IS IMPERATIVE OF COURSE THAT THESE DEVELOPMENTS
DO NOT ADVERSELY AFFECT THE QUALITY OF THE WATERS OF THE
RIVER MURRAY. I AM THEREFORE PLEASED THAT THE CITIES
COMMISSION HAS BEEN SUPERVISING WHAT MUST BE ONE OF THE
MOST COMPREHENSIVE WATER QUALITY STUDIES EVER UNDERTAKEN IN
AUSTRALIA IN RELATION TO THE ALBURY-WODONGA GROWTH CENTRE.
THE REPORT OF THIS STUDY WILL BE AVAILABLE LATER THIS YEAR
AND I AM CONFIDENT THAT IT WILL ENSURE THAT TREATMENT
SYSTEMS WILL BE SO IMPLEMENTED THAT ALBURY-WODONGA WILL NOT
HAVE SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECTS ON WATER QUALITY IN THE
RIVER MURRAY, WHEN I MET WITH THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND VICTORIA ON 25 JANUARY 1973 IN ALBURY-WODONGA WE SAID
THAT SERVICES WILL BE PROVIDED TO THE HIGHEST POSSIBLE
STANDARD TO PROTECT THE INTERESTS OF OTHER USERS OF THE
RIVER MURRAY; THIS STATEMENT I STILL STAND BY,
THE IMPLICATIONS OF OTHER FORMS OF LAND USE HAVE
NOT BEEN EVALUATED IN COMPARABLE DEPTH AND I SAY AGAIN
THAT AN OVERALL EXAMINATION OF LAND USE IN THE MURRAY REGION
IS ESSENTIAL, OUR POSITION IN RELATION TO MANAGEMENT OF
THE RIVER MURRAY IS CLEAR: THE RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION
SHOULD HAVE THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTROL OF WATER QUALITY
IN THE RIVER MURRAY, FURTHER I BELIEVE THAT THE RIVER
MURRAY COMMISSION SHOULD HAVE CERTAIN RESPONSIBILITIES IN
RELATION TO ALL ASPECTS OF THE USE AND MANAGEMENT OF THE
WATERS OF THE RIVER MURRAY AND ITS RELATED LANDS, 
-8-
IN A COMPLEX SYSTEM SUCH AS THE RIVER MURRAY VALLEY WITH
ITS VARIOUS INTER-RELATIONSHIPS IT IS SURELY SELF-EVIDENT
THAT THERE NEEDS TO BE A BODY TO COORDINATE THE PLANNING
OF THESE VARIOUS ASPECTS. BECAUSE THE RIVER RUNS THROUGH
THREE STATES, AN INTERSTATE AGENCY SUCH AS AN EXPANDED
RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION IS CLEARLY REQUIRED. THIS CONCEPT
OF AN INTER-STATE BODY MANAGING WATER RESOURCES ON A RIVER
BASIN BASIS WOULD ACCORD WITH WORLDWIDE TRENDS IN THIS
DIRECTION EXEMPLIFIED BY THE DELAWARE AND SUSQUEHANNA RIVER
BASIN COMPACTS IN THE UNITED STATES, NEGOTIATED BY THE
STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS, AND THE RECENT ESTABLISHMENT
OF REGIONAL WATER AUTHORITIES IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD SEE SUCH A BODY
PRINCIPALLY PLAYING A CO-ORDINATING ROLE, MUCH OF I-TS
FUNCTION BEING OF AN ADVISORY OR DELIBERATIVE NATURE ONLY,
THE ORGANISATION MIGHT NEED SOME STRONG " LAST RESORT POWERS"
TO ENSURE ITS EFFECTIVENESS. HOWEVER, EXPERIENCE IN THE
UNITED STATES INDICATES THAT THESE ARE RARELY USED, IF AT ALL.
WE WOULD ALSO SEE SUCH A BODY HAVING A DEFINITE OBLIGATION
TO CONSULT WITH SUCH GROUPS AS THE MURRAY VALLEY DEVELOPMENT
LEAGUEI / 9 
-9-
I AM SURE THAT ONE OF THE REASONS FOR LACK OF
INTEREST IN THIS BROADER APPROACH TO THE USE AND MANAGEMENT
OF THE RIVER MURRAY IS DUE TO A FEAR THAT SOME OF THE STATE
POWERS MAY BE FORFEITED TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, WHILE
STATE GOVERNMENTS COULD LOSE SOME OF THEIR RIGHT TO
INDIVIDUAL ACTION, I EMPHASISE THAT THESE RIGHTS WOULD
BE VESTED IN AN INTER-STATE BODY ACTING IN THE BEST
INTERESTS OF ALL CONCERNED. AS PUT SO WELL BY DR CASS
RECENTLY, THIS IS A CASE WHERE STATES' RIGHTS ARE NONSENSE; IT
IS PEOPLES' RIGHTS WHICH ARE IMPORTANT AND THAT MEANS ALL
THE PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON THE RIVER AND ITS RELATED LANDS
IN ALL THREE STATES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN DO LITTLE IN THE
WAY OF DIRECT ACTION IN THIS AREA; CONSENSUS IS THE ONLY
WAY OF ACHIEVING ANYTHING. I BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE MADE
SUGGESTIONS TO STATE GOVERNMENTS ALONG THE LINES OF WHAT
IS DESIRED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE MURRAY VALLEY. WE SHALL
CONTINUE TO PUT PROPOSALS BUT WE CAN DO LITTLE MORE. I URGE
E FEDERAL MEMBERS HERE TONIGHT, WHATEVER THEIR POLITICAL
PERSUASIONS, TO TAKE THIS MATTER UP WITH THEIR STATE
COLLEAGU'. WITH A VIEW TO CONVEYING A GREATER SENSE OF
URGENCY AND PRIORI,.
I HAVE SAID THAT I AM CONCERNED WITH THE LACK
OF PROGRESS OF THE WORKING PARTY. IF IN MARCH 1975 WHICH
WILL BE TWO YEARS AFTER MY MEETING WITH THE THREE PREMIERS
PROGRESS HAS BEEN UNSATISFACTORY, THEN I SHALL CALL FOR
A FURTHER MEETING WITH STATE PREMIERS IN ORDER TO OBTAIN 
AGREEMENT ON AN ACCELERATED PROGRAM FOR COMPLETION OF
THE WORKING PARTY'S INVESTIGATIONS. THIS IS ONE EXAMPLE
OF DIRECT ACTION THAT I CAN TAKE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD ALSO GIVE
SERIOUS CONSIDERATION TO REQUESTS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
FROM STATE GOVERNMBENTS FOR MEASURES TO ACHIEVE AND MAINTAIN
SATISFACTORY WATER QUALITY, BE THEY FOR ENGINEERING WORKS
OR FOR THE RESTRUCTURING OF LAND USE IN THE REGION.
SUCH REQUESTS WOULD BE CONSIDERED IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICY TOWARDS WAT ER RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT. IN THIS CONTEXT I WOULD LIKE TO REPEAT A
SPECIFIC. OFFER MADE TO STATE MINISTERS By DR CASS LAST
YEAR WHICH WAS NOT TAKEN UP THE AUSTRALIAN GOV'ERNMENT
WILL PROV'IDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TOWARDS ANY STUDIES
IN THE REGION WHICH IT CONSIDERS WOULD CONTRIBUTE
SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE IMPROVED USE AND MANAGEMENT OF THE
RIVER MURRAY WATERS AND RELATED LANDS. BECAUSE STATE
GOVERNMENTS APPEAR TO BE CONCENTRATING ON ENGINEERING
STUDIES, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD PREFER TO FUND
STUDIES BIASED TOWARDS THE SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SC I ENCES. I / 11 
-11-
SIXTY YEARS HAVE PASSED SINCE THE SIGNING
OF THE ORIGINAL RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT AND I
BELIEVE WE ARE AGAIN ABOUT TO ENTER A PERIOD OF CONFLICT
OVER THE USES OF THE RIVER MURRAY WATERSI TOGETHER
WITH INCREASING PRESSURES ON THE ENVIRONMENT. I DO NOT
BELIEVE THE PRESENT RIVER MURRAY COMMISSION OR EXISTING
STATE INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE ABLE
TO COPE WITH THESE PROBLEMS AND I BELIEVE NEW ARRANGEMENTS
ARE NECESSARY, I URGE ALL PARTIES CONCERNED TO PROCEED AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE TO DEVELOP AN APPROACH TO THE
MANAGEMENT OF THE RIVER MURRAY WHICH WILL ENSURE THAT
THE WATERS ARE USED TO PROVIDE MAXIMUM REGIONAL AND
NATIONAL BENEFITS IN SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
TERMS. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G, WHITLAM, QC,, M. P.,
TO THE N, SW. COUNTRY PRESS ASSOCIATION, QUEANBEYAN,.-
THURSDAY 24 OCTOBER 1974.
THE REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON AUSTRALIA'S
RURAL POLICY THE GREEN. PAPER DREW ATTENTION TO A
VERY REAL DIFFICULTY FACED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND BY INFERENCE POINTED TO THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
COUNTRY PRESS. THE REPORT SAID: " EFFECTIVE
COMMUNICATION IS AN ESSENTIAL COMPONENT OF POLICY MAKING
IN ANY SECTOR OF THE COMMUNITYX THERE ARE PARTICULAR
FACTORS IN THE CASE OF THE FARM SECTOR THAT OUGHT TO BE
GIVEN CAREFUL CONSIDERATION SINCE THEY SUGGEST RATHER
SPECIAL NEEDSm FARMERS AND OTHERS IN RURAL AREAS ARE
RELATIVELY ISOLATED IN TERMS OF THE NORMAL COMMUNICATION
CHANNELS, THE MAIN DIFFICULTIES IN GETTING A BALANCED
VIEW OF CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES ARE COMPOUNDED BY THEIR
DEPENDENCE ON A SMALLER NUMBER OF COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS.
AT TIMES PRESENTING ISSUES FROM A PARTICULAR VIEWPOINTx",
ONE OF THE AIMS OF THE GREENPAPER ITSELF WAS
TO IMPROVE COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE RURAL COMMUNITYx WHEN I WROTE ON 14 DECEMBER
LAST YEAR TO DR STUART HARRIS AND ESTABLISHED THE WORKING
GROUP I SAID: " I HOPE THE REPORT WILL PROVIDE A BASIS
FOR WIDESPREAD DIALOGUE IN THE PARLIAMENT, IN RURAL
ORGANISATIONS AND IN THE COMMUNITY GENERALLYx". 
IN PROMOTING THAT DIALOGUE, COUNTRY NEWSPAPERS HAVE AN
INDISPENSABLE ROLEX I EMPHASISE THAT WHAT WE SEEK IS
A DIALOGUEe: THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, SENATOR
WRIEDT, HAS BEEN ASSIDUOUS IN PROMOTING ITx SOME OF
THE DIFFICULTIES IN MAINTAINING A DIALOGUE WILL BE
APPARENT TO THOSE OF YOU WHO SAW SENATOR WRIEDT ON
THIS WEEK'S " MONDAY CONFERENCE" FROM-TooWOOMBAx IT
IS VERY DIFFICULT INDEED TO HAVE A DIALOGUE WITH THOSE
WHO ARE JUST DETERMINED NOT TO LISTENx BE THAT AS IT
MAY, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO
CONTINUE ITS EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE MEANINGFUL, CONSTRUCTIVE
DIALOGUE WITH THE RURAL COMMUNITY, NOT ONLY THOSE WHO
LIVE ON. FARMS BUT THE FAR LARGER SECTION OF COUNTRYDWELLERS
WHO LIVE IN COUNTRY TOWNSK
THE QUOTATION I GAVE FROM THE GREEN PAPER
REFERS TO THE PHYSICAL DIFFICULTIES OF COMMUNICATIONSi
IT MUST BE ACKNOWLEDGED, HOWEVER, THAT THE PRESENT
GOVERNMENT FACES AN ADDITIONAL DIFFICULTY NOT ENCOUNTERED
BY ITS PREDECESSORK' IT STEMS FROM A BELIEF A FALSE
BELIEF THAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY AND THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT IS EXCLUSIVELY URBAN-BASED
THAT WE ARE ANTI-RURAL, THAT WE ARE DOWN ON THE FARMERx
THE MYTH IS SEDULOUSLY FOSTERED BY OUR OPPONENTSr 3/ 
-3-
IT IS REINFORCED TO SOME EXTENT BY THE UNDOUBTED FACT
THAT THE MARGIN OF OUR VICTORY IN 1972 CAME PRINCIPALLY
FROM SEATS WE WERE ABLE TO WIN IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNEK
THE FACT THAT OUR SUPPORT CONTINUED FIRM IN THOSE AREAS
ENABLED US TO RETAIN OFFICE IN MAYx NATURALLY I AM
GRATEFUL FOR THAT SUPPORT; BUT IT IS IRRATIONAL TO
DRAW THE CONCLUSION THAT GRATITUDE FOR ONE SECTION IMPLIES
HOSITILITY OR INDIFFERENCE TOWARDS ANY OTHER SECTION OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITYs THE FACT IS THAT THE LABOR
PARTY IS NEITHER AN URBAN NOR A RURAL PARTYx IT IS A
NATIONAL PARTY GUIDED BY NATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS' THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
WELFARE OF THE ENTIRE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS WHEREVER THEY LIVEK THE BROAD RANGE OF
OUR POLICIES ARE DIRECTED TO THE WELL-BEING'OF ALL
AUSTRALIANSX THE IDEA THAT OUR POLICIES ARE DIRECTED
AGAINST THE RURAL COMMUNITY WILL NOT BEAR EXAMINATIONX
IT IS TRUE THAT ON TAKING OFFICE WE CONSIDERED THAT AS
A MATTER OF URGENT PRIORITY IT WAS NECESSARY TO
REASSESS POLICY OBJECTIVES PURSUED BY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTSk
IT WAS NECESSARY TO RE-EXAMINE THE APPROPRIATENESS OF
BOTH THE LEVELS AND FORMS OF ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO
ALL SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY INCLUDING THE RURAL SECTORx 4/ 
AFTER 23 YEARS WE INHERITED THE CONSEQUENCES OF A
LARGE NUMBER OF DECISIONS AND NON-DECISIONS WHICH
WERE NOT ONLY INCONSISTENT WITH OUR DECLARED GOALS
FOR AUSTRALIA, THE GOALS WHICH HAD BEEN ENDORSED BY
THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, BUT WHICH INDEED WERE OFTEN
INCONSISTENT WITH THEMSELVES AND COUNTER-PRODUCTIVEx
WE WANTED TO SEE THAT THE NATION'S ECONOMIC RESOURCES
WERE ALLOCATED MORE EFFICIENTLY AND MORE FAIRLYx
THAT IS STILL OUR OBJECTIVEr
IN THE CASE OF THE RURAL SECTOR I ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT WE HAD TO TAKE SOME UNPOPULAR DECISIONS IN THE
INTERESTS OF EFFICIENCY AND IN THE INTERESTS OF
FAIRNESSK IT IS ALWAYS UNPOPULAR TO APPEAR TO BE
TAKING SOMETHING AWAY, HOWEVER ILLUSORY THE PRESUMED
BENEFIT MAY IN FACT BEx IF WE WERE SIMPLY WITHDRAWING
BENEFITS WITHOUT ANY EFFORT TO SUBSTITUTE SOMETHING
MORE SUBSTANTIAL THEN WE WOULD DESERVE ALL CRITICISM,
BUT WE HAVE NOT ACTED IN THAT WAYx 
LET ME ILLUSTRATE A GENERAL PRINCIPLE BY
REFERRING TO ONE PARTICULAR GRIPEv THE REDUCTION
IN THE EDUCATION ALLOWANCE IS DEPICTED IN SOME
QUARTERS AS A MEAN TRICK AGAINST THE COUNTRY STUDENTS
OR THEIR PARENTSi THE FACT IS THAT WE ARE THE FIRST
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FULLY TO RECOGNISE THE
DISADVANTAGES SUFFERED BY COUNTRY-STUDENTS AND TO ACT
SERIOUSLY TO REDUCE THEMx WE WERE PARTICULARLY
DISTURBED BY THE FINDINGS OF THE KARMEL COMMITTEE ON
EDUCATION WHICH STATED: " THE LENGTH OF SCHOOLING
AND PARTICIPATION IN HIGHER EDUCATION AMONG COUNTRY
STUDENTS IN AUSTRALIA ARE CONSPICUOUSLY LOWER THAN
AMONG CITY ONES THERE ARE INDICATIONS THAT THE
PROBLEM GOES BEYOND RETENTION RATES HIGH TEACHER
TURNOVER, BOARDING DIFFICULTIES AND THE ADDED EXPENSE
OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IN DISTANT CENTRES ARE CLEARLY
SIGNIFICANT IN LOWERING RETENTION; ATTITUDES TO
EDUCATION, LIMITED CULTURAL FACILITIES IN THE COMMUNITY,
LACK OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THOSE WHO
COMPLETE SECONDARY EDUCATION AND THE POSSIBILITY THAT
THE CURRICULUM OFFERED IN THE SCHOOLS IS SEEN AS
HAVING LESS RELEVANCE TO COUNTRY CHILDREN HAVE BEEN I'
SUGGESTED AS EXPLANATIONS FOR LOWER ATTAINMENT. x
So FOR THE FIRST TIME WE ARE MAKING SPECIAL ASSISTANCE
TO ISOLATED CHILDREN ABOUT 5,000 IN NSW, ARE
CURRENTLY RECEIVING GRANTS TOTALLING $ 2 MILLION) .6/ 
THE KANGAN COMMITTEE ON TECHNICAL AND
FURTHER EDUCATION NOTED IN ITS REPORT THAT COUNTRY
PEOPLE HAD PROBLEMS OF ACCESS TO TECHNICAL
EDUCATION AND TO RETRAINING FOR A NEW CAREER AND
CONSEQUENTLY WERE OFTEN OBLIGED TO MOVE TO THE
CITIESX THE NEW STAGE OF OUR EDUCATION POLICY
EMBODIED IN THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE KARMEL AND
KANGAN COMMITTEES ADOPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT WILL
BRING NEW OPPORTUNITIES TO COUNTRY BOYS AND GIRLS;
AND WE WANT THEM TO BE ABLE TO ENJOY THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE PLACES WHERE THEIR PARENTS
LIVEx EDUCATION IS JUST ONE EXAMPLE OF THE
GREAT MOTIVE BEHIND OUR PROGRAM THE DRIVE FOR
NEW OPPORTUNITIES AND MORE EQUAL ACCESS TO THESE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANSx THIS IS THE
PRINCIPLE BEHIND OUR APPROACH TO REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENTW IT IS JUST NONSENSE TO PUT THIS IN
TERMS OF CITY VERSUS COUNTRYx WE DO NOT THINK IN
THAT WAY AND THE MACHINERY WE ARE CREATING TO
PROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS IS NOT DESIGNED
TO WORK THAT WAY .7/ 
-7-
FOR YEARS AND YEARS I HAVE PUT TO THE PEOPLE OF
AUSTRALIA THE PROPOSITION THAT INCREASINGLY A FAMILY' S
STANDARD OF LIVING DEPENDS NOT SO MUCH ON ITS INCOME
AS WHERE IT LIVES$ WE HAVE SET OUT DELIBERATELY TO
REDUCE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS AND THEREBY PROMOTE
THE REAL STANDARD OF LIVING OF ALL AUSTRALIANS WHEREVER
THEY CHiOOSE TO LIVE OR ARE OBLIGED TO LIVEK WHEN THE
AUSTRALIAN GRANTS COMMISSION WAS ESTABLISHED IN 1933
IT WAS EMPOWERED TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ON THE FINANCE. NEEDED TO REDUCE
INEQUALITIES BETWEEN STATES^ WE LEGISLATED TO DO
FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREAS FOR REGIONS WITHIN THE
STATES WHAT THE GRANTS COMMISSION USED TO BE'ABLE
TO DO ONLY AS BETWEEN THE STATESX WE HAVE ACCEPTED
A GREAT AND GROWING COMMITMENT ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENTx WE WANT TO SEE THAT THE STANDARDS OF
ALL REGIONS THE COUNTRY TOWNS JUST AS MUCH AS
THE NEW SUBURBS ARE BROUGHT UP TO THE BEST
STANDARDS ACCEPTABLE MODERN STANDARDS WORTHY OF
THE REAL WEALTH OF OUR NATIONA ,8/ 
AND AS TO THAT WEALTH, LET THERE BE NO
DOUBT ABOUT OUR RECOGNITION OF THE CONTRIBUTION
TO IT WHICH IS MADE BY THE AUSTRALIAN RURAL COMMUNITYi
OUR BASIC OBJECTIVE FOR RURAL INDUSTRY IS TO PROVIDE
A FIRM AND LASTING BASIS FOR INCREASED TRADE IN
THOSE RURAL COMMODITIES'WHICH WILL PROVIDE ASSURED
LONG TERM MARKETS AT FAIR PRICESx WE HAVE BEEN
VIGOROUS AND SUCCESSFUL IN SECURING TRADE AGREEMENTS,
MANY OF THEM WITH COUNTRIES WITH WHICH HITHERTO WE
HAD HARDLY ANY COMMERCIAL CONTACTX
ABOVE ALL WE HAVE SHOWN THE GREATEST
DEGREE OF FLEXIBILITY IN OUR EFFORTS TO HELP THE
RURAL COMMUNITY TO ADJUST TO OUR DRIVE FOR GREATER
EFFICIENCY AND EQUALITYx WE HAVE HAD TO TAKE
MANY DECISIONS IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST AS PART OF
THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION AND PART OF THE CAMPAIGN
FOR GREATER PRODUCTIVITY; BUT WE HAVE BEEN SENSITIVE
AND SYMPATHETIC IN DEALING WITH THE IMMEDIATE
PROBLEMS CREATED BY THESE MEASURESy FOR INSTANCE,
ALTHOUGH THE 25 PER CENT TARIFF CUT IS ADVANTAGEOUS
TO THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF PEOPLE LIVING IN
THE COUNTRY, WE HAVE RECOGNISED THAT THERE ARE
COUNTRY CITIES AND TOWNS WHICH HAVE FOUND IT DIFFICULT
TO COPE IMMEDIATELY WITH THE CONSEQUENCESX .9/ 
_ 9-
UNLY THIS WEEK WE APPROVED A NEW SCHEME OF
ASSISTANCE TO COUNTRY TOWNS ADVERSELY AFFECTED
BY OUR STRUCTURAL CHANGES) THIS ASSISTANCE IS
BASED ON THE INABILITY OF COUNTRY TOWNS WITH A
LIMITED RANGE OF JOB OPPORTUNITIES TO ABSORB
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN THE STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENTx
I AM INDEBTED TO MY COLLEAGUE BOB WHAN,
M. P, FOR EDEN-MONARO THIS ELECTORATE FOR
DRAWING TO MY ATTENTION TWO SETS OF FIGURES WHICH.
I THINK PUT INTO PERSPECTIVE THE POLICIES OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THEIR CONSEQUENCESX
THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS STATES THAT IN
1971, 775-7AUSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR
AS 1IS'iCE F; OK; THE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION BOARD)
THIS YEAR, THE FIGURE IS DOWN TO-52 APPLICATIONSk
SECONDLY, THIS YEAR'S BUDGET PROVIDES FOR $ 487.6 MILLION.
IN RURAL ASSISTANCE, AN INCREASE OF $ 158 MILLION ON
1972/ 73x THIS SURELY IS NOT THE RECORD OF A
GOVERNMENT INDIFFERENT TO RURAL INTERESTS OR iNADEQt; ATE
TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF RURAL INDUSTRYx I DON'T
BRUSH ASIDE THOSE PROBLEMSX BUT WE HAVE TO RECOGNISE
THAT THOSE PROBLEMS, LIKE SO MUCH OF OUR CURRENT
ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES, SPRING FROM AN INCREASINGLY
DIFFICULT AND COMPLEX WORLD SITUATIONg 
THEY CAN'T BE SOLVED BY HYSTERIA OR FEAR OR PANICX
THEY CAN'T BE SOLVED BY CREATING NATIONAL DIVISION
AND BITTERNESS, PARTICULARLY THE MOST ARTIFICIAL
OF ALL DIVISIONS THAT BETWEEN CITY AND COUNTRYx
WHEN I ADDRESSED THE UNITED NATIONS I EMPHASISED
THE INTERDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE OF THE WORLD
COMMUNITYx IF THIS IS TRUE ON THE INTERNATIONAL
LEVEL, HOW MUCH GREATER FORCE IT HAS WITHIN THE
NATIONX I REPEAT, WE ARE DETERMINED AS A GOVERNMENT
TO MAINTAIN A GENUINE, A RATIONAL DIALOGUE WITH THE
RURAL COMMUNITY IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH RATIONAL
POLICIES WHICH WILL PLACE AUSTRALIA'S GREAT RURAL
INDUSTRIES ON A SECURE AND SOUND COURSEx AS THE
POSSESSORS OF A VERY VALUABLE MEANS OF COMMUNICATION,
YOU CAN PLAY A CRUCIAL PART IN PROMOTING THAT DIALOGUE
AND I SEEK YOUR CO-OPERATION IN ACHIEVING ITX 


MBARGO 900 PAL.SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, MoPe,TO THE AUSTRALIAN FARMERS' FEDERATIOQfCANBERRA, TUESDAY 29 OCTOBER 1974I RECALL WITH GREAT PLEASURE THE RECEPTION YOUGAVE ME A YEAR AGO WHEN I ADDRESSED YOUR FEDERATION HEREIN THIS CIT?, YOU SHOWED YOURSELVES THEN AS YOU HAVEALWAYS DONEIN YOUR NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT ANDIN YOU PRE-BUDGET SUBMISSIONS TO THE CABINET TO BERECEPTIVE, RESPONSIBLE AND REASONABLE. SINCE I LASTSPOKE TO YOU OUR ECONOMIC PROBLEMS HAVE INCREASED AND THEDIFFICULTIES FACED BY FARMERS HAVE INCREASED. I ACKNOWLEDGETHOSE FACTS FRANKLY AT THE OUTSET. I MAKE NO APOLOGY,HOWEVER. FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S RURAL POLICIES. I . INTEND TOSHOW YOU THAT OUR POLICIES ARE NOT ONLY SOUND BUT GENEROUS,AND THAT IF WE ARE TRULY DETERMINED TO IMPROVE THE'PROSPECTSOF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES THERE IS NO RATIONAL ALTERNATIVETO THEM. I AM NOT HERE TO OFFER YOU SOFT SOAP OR HOLD OUTPROSPECTS OF MAGICAL SOLUTIONS, ANY MORE THAN I AM PREPAREDTO DO SO FOR OTHER SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY. I WANT TOTELL YOU AS CLEARLY AND FULLY AS I CAN WHAT WE HAVE DONE FORYOUR INDUSTRIES AND WHAT WE HOPE TO DO. I WANT TO CONVINCEYOU THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS YOUR INTERESTS TRULYAT HEART, AND THAT YOUR FUTURE GIVEN GOODWILL AND GOODSENSE IS A BRIGHT ONE.
-2-IT IS TEMPTING FOR FARMERS IN TIMES OF ECONOMICDIFFICULTY TO SEEK A SCAPEGOAT FOR THEIR PROBLEMS. 1TisPARTICULARLY TEMPTING TO MAKE THE LABOR GOVERNMENT THESCAPEGOAT AND IMAGINE THAT ALL YOUR TROUBLES CAN BE LAIDAT THE GOVERNMENT'S DOOR. YOU WOULD BE VERY FOOLISH TOADOPT THAT ATTITUDE. IHAVE TOO MUCH RESPECT FOR YOURINTELLIGENCC AND YOUR REALISM AS MEN* OF. THE LAND TO IMAGINETHAT YOU WILL FALL FOR THE LINE, SEDULOUSLY FOSTERED BYOUR OPPONENTS, THAT LABOR IS AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. WE HAVEHEARD THESE SLOGANS BEFORE. IHAVE ANSWERED THEM BEFORE.IAM TIRED OF THEM AND I AM PREPARED TO BET THAT YOU. AREPRETTY TIRED OF THEM YOURSELVES. THEY SOLVE NOTHINGI.THE DIFFICULTIES FACED BY OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES ARE OF TWOBROAD KINDS. THERE ARE THOSE CONCERNED WITH CHAN~ GINGINTERNATIONAL MARKETS, WORLD PRICES AND CLIMATIC'ANDSEASONAL FLUCTUATIONS. No GOVERNMENT CAN DO MUCH ABOUT THESEDIFFICULTIES OTHER THAN RELIEVEHARDSHIP AS BEST IT CANTHOUGHON THE QUESTION OF OVERSEAS MARKETS WE HAVE APARTICULARLY FINE RECORD AND I SHALL DEAL-WITH IT LATER.THE SECOND KIND OF PROBLEM YOU FACE HAS TO DO WITH THEGENERAL ECONOMIC-CONDITION OF THE NATION. ' TO A LARGE EXTENTTHE PROBLEMS FACED BY RURAL INDUSTRIES ARE THOSE FACED BY THEENTIRE COMMUNITY. YOU ARE NOT ALONE.' INFLATION TOUCHES ALLOF US AND BEATING INFLATION IS A TASK FOR ALL OF US. ITALSO HAPPENS TO BE A PROBLEM FOR EVERY DEVELOPED COUNTRY INTHE WORLD. .3
-3-IT IS IN NO WAY HELPFUL TO PRETEND THAT FARMERS ' AN ISOLATETHEMSELVES FROM THE REST OF THE COMMUNITY OR FROM. THE RESTOF THE WORLD, OR THAT THEIR DIFFICULTIES CAN BE CUREDWITH A LITTLE EXTRA MONEY OR A LITTLE EXTRA LIP-SERVICEFROM A GOVERNMENT OF ANOTHER COLOUR. ANYONE WHO TRIESTO SELL YOU THAT LINE IS UNDERRATING YOUR GOOD SENSE,ANYONE WHO-BELIEVES IT IS DOING HIMSELF AND THE FARMERSOF THIS COUNTRY A DISSERVICE.THE LONG-TERM PROBLEMS OF THE RURAL INDUSTRIESARE DEEP AND COMPLEX LIKE THOSE OF ALL OTHER INDUSTRIES.THEY HAVE TO DO WITH A GENERAL AND PERVADING CRISIS IN THEWESTERN DEMOCRACIES, THEY HAVE TO DO WITH THE LONG-TERMEFFICIENCY OF OUR INDUSTRIES, THE USE WE MAKE OF OURMANPOWER AND RESOURCES, THE CONDITIONS OF OUR CITIES ANDTOWNS AND TRANSPORT, THE PROBLEMS OF MARKETS, INTERNATIONALTRADE AND CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS. I ASK YOU TO FACE THESEFACTS WITH ME. IF YOU PREFER TO BLAME EVERYTHING ON THEGOVERNMENT, IF YOU IMAGINE THAT THE GOVERNMENT CAN SOLVEYOUR PROBLEMS MERELY BY A CHANGE OF HEART, IF YOU PREFERTO LIVE IN A WORLD OF FANTASY AND COUNTRY PARTY SLOGANSTHERE IS LITTLE MY GOVERNMENT OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT CANDO FOR YOU. IT IS TIME FOR MORE CO-OPERATION, MOREGOODWILL AND, IF I MAY SAY SO, A LOT MORE ' REALISM FROM THEFARMING COMMUNITY. I DO NOT'BRUSH ASIDE YOUR PROBLEMS ANDI DO NOT DENY YOUR RIGHT TO PROTEST IF YOU BELIEVE YOU HAVEGENUINE GRIEVANCES. I DO SAY THAT FARMERS WHO DEMONSTRATEAGAINST THIS GOVERNMENT SHOULD EXAMINE THE RECORD FAIRLY ANDLOOK AT THE FACTS ABOUT THEIR DIFFICULTIES AND WHAT THEGOVERNMENT HAS DONE TQ HELP THEM.
-4-I'AM HAPPY TO LET THE FACTS PSEAK FOR THEMSELV. S, I HOPEYOU WILL BE HAPPY TO LISTEN TO-THEM,I PUT IT TO YOU THAT NO GOVERNMENT HAS DONEMORE FOR THE FARMERS THAN MINE. NOT JUST FOR THE MANON THE LAND BUT FOR THE WHOLE RURAL COMMUNITY, FOR THE3,000,000 AND MORE AUSTRALIANS 24% OF OUR PEOPLE WHOLIVE IN COUNTRY TOWNS. AND NOT JUST IN TERMS OF CASHBENEFITS AND SPENDING BUT IN THE DIFFICULT, CREATIVE, TESTINGBUSINESS OF SEEKING LONG-TERM SOLUTIONS AND DEVELOPINGTHE'INSTITUTIONS AND POLICIES NEEDED TO SECURE A BETTERLIFE. FOR FARMERS AND THEIR FAMILIES.LET ME GIVE YOU SOME FIGURES FIRST OF ALL. MONEYISN'T EVERYTHING BUT THE FIGURES SPEAK LOUD AND CLEAR. INOUR LAST BUDGET, OUTLAYS ON RURAL ASSISTANCE TOTALLED$ 488 MILLION $ 158 MILLION MORE THAN LAST YEAR. THERE WASA NET INCREASE IN OUR PAYMENTS TO AGRICULTURE OF $ 88 MILLIONOVER THE BUDGET IN 1973-74. THAT IS HARDLY THE SORT OFBUDGET ONE WOULD EXPECT FROM AN ANTI-RURAL PARTY. I AMAFRAID WE HEAR ALL TO LITTLE FROM THE FARMERS AND THEIRSELF-PROCLAIMED ALLIES ABOUT THE CREDIT SIDE OF LABOR'SLEDGER THE $ 56 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ON AN ANIMAL HEALTH,LABORATORY, THE $ 28 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ON A DAIRYRESTRUCTURING SCHEME, THE $ 40 MILLION WE ARE SPENDING ININCREASED FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENTS FOR WHEAT, THE $ 45 MILLIONWE ARE SPENDING ON THE NATURAL DISASTER RELIEF FUND, MOST OFWHICH WILL GO TO PEOPLE IN COUNTRY AREAS. THESE ARE JUSTA FEW EXAMPLES.
IN* THE CONTEXT OF CASH BENEFITS PERHAPS I SHOULDDEAL PROMPTLY WITH ONE PARTICULAR AND NOTORIOUS GRIEVANCEOF THE RURAL COMMUNITY. TO LISTEN TO THE COUNTRY PARTYANYONE WOULD IMAGINE THAT ALL THE TROUBLES OF THE RURALSECTOR WERE DUE TO OUR DECISION TO ABOLISH THE SUPERPHOSPHATEBOUNTY. WE DECIDED TO END THIS SUBSIDY. BECAUSE THE ORIGINALREASONS FOR INTRODUCING IT REASONS WHICH ALONE WOULD JUSTIFYA MEASURE OF THIS KIND AT THE TAXPAYERSI EXPENSE NO LONGEREXIST. IT WAS INTRODUCED WHEN THE PARAMOUNT NEED OF THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WAS TO ENCOURAGE RURAL PRODUCTION. TOEARN FOREIGN EXCHANGE. THERE IS NO LONGER SUCH A NEED. THEABOLITION OF THE BOUNTY MOST OF WHICH WENT TO THE WEALTHIESTFARMERS WHO NEED IT LEAST WILL SAVE ABOUT $ 56 MILLION.THAT IS APPROXIMATELY THE COST OF OUR PROPOSED ANIMAL HEALTHLABORATORY. THE BENEFITS TO RURAL PRODUCERS FROM THATLABORATORY WILL BE INFINITELY GREATER THAN THE BENEFIT FROMTHE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY. SO HERE IS AN EXAMPLE OF THEMORERATIONAL USE OF RESOURCES,. As YOU KNOW, WE HAVE REMOVEDA NUMBER OF OTHER RURAL SUBSIDIES WHICH WE CONSIDEREDWASTEFUL OR SELF-DEFEATING. THE SUPERPHOSPHATE BOUNTY IS THEONLY ONE OF THESE SUBSIDIES WHICH THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTIESHAVE SPECIFICALLY PROMISED TO RESTORE AND IF THERE HAD NOTBEEN AN ELECTION LAST MAY I DOUBT IF THEY WOULD HAVE PROMISEDEVEN THAT. SO WHENEVER YOU ARE TEMPTED TO BLAME A LABOR6*GOVERNMENT FOR DECISIONS THAT YOU FEEL TO'BE AGAINST YOURINTERESTS, LOOK CAREFULLY TO SEE WHETHER OUR OPPONENTS WOULDACT ANY DIFFERENTLY$ / 6
-6-IWANT TO DEAL WITH THE BROAD ASP~ T.*: S OF OURPROGRAM AS THEY AFFECT COUNTRY DWELLERS NQT JUSTFARMERS. IT SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN THAT EVERYTHING THISGOVERNMENT HAS DONE FOR. CITY PEOPLE IT HAS DONE FORCOUNTRY PEOPLE AS WELL.,. IT IS CENTRAL TO OUR PHILOSOPHYTHAT THE OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE To AUSTRALIANS FOR ABETTER LIFE SHOULD BE AVAILABLE EQUJALLY TO ALL AUSTRALIANSWHEREVER THEY LIVE. OUR ACHIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, HEALTHCARE AND SOCIAL WELFARE, TO TAKE JUST THREE EXAMPLES, ARENOT BENEFITS FOR CITY PEOPLE ALONE. IN MANY WAYS TH EY AREOF GREATER IMPORTANCE TO COUNTRY PEOPLE. MY COLLEAGUESENATOR WRIEDT MADE THE POINT THE OTHER DAY THAT ONLY 4%OF AUSTRALIAN FARMERS HAD HAD A TERTIARY EDUCATION. THATREGRETTABLE FACT HAS A LOT TO DO WITH THE. LIMITED EDUCATIONALOPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE IN THE COUNTRY. CHILDREN IN RURALAREAS HAVE SUFFERED FROM THEIR ISOLATION. WE ARE THE FIRSTGOVERNMENT TO TACKLE THIS PROBLEM. ONE WAY OF SPENDINGFUNDS ON EDUCATION IS TO CONCENTRATE ON PROGRAMS FORISOLATED CHILDREN IN RURAL'AREAS. THAT IS WHAT WE-* ARE DOING.IKNOW WHICH COURSE IS MORE IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN. LETUS FACE THESE FACTS SQUARELY IF ONLY FOR THE SAKE OF OURCHILDREN. I 1 0 S 17
-7-THE LAST LIBERAL BUDGET PROVIDED $ 2k MI1LLION FORSPECIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN. THIS '( EAR WE.HAVE BUDGETED FOR $ 11k MILLION. THE LAST LIBERAL IlObtiETGAVE $ 6 MILLION FOR RURAL UNIVERSITIES. WE ARE SPENDING$ 21 MILLION THIS YEAR. FOR COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATIONIN THE RURAL SECTOR, IT WAS $ 12 MILLION IN THE LAST LIBERALBUDGET; IT IS $ 47 MILLION IN OUR BUDGET..IF WE TAKE SOCIAL SECURITY PAYMENTS WE FIND THAT$ 880 MILLION -OR 46% O OF OUR TOTAL EXPENDITURE THROUGHOUTAUSTRALIA GOES TO RURAL AREAS. OUR REGIONAL EMPLOYMENTDEVELOPMENT SCHEME, OUR NATIONAL ROADS AND HIGHWAYSPROGRAMS, OUR PLANS FOR CHILD CARE, OUR SPECIAL ASSISTANCETO INDUSTRIES IN COUNTRY CITIES AND TOWNS AFFECTED BYUNEMPLOYMENT -THESE ARE ALL MEASURES OF PARTICULAR BENEFITTO COUNTRY PEOPLE. OUR TAX CUTS FOR PEOPLE ON INCOMESBELOW $ 10,000 A YEAR WILL ASSIST MANY FARMERS. SO WILL OURPROPOSAL TO ALLOW MORTGAGE INTEREST PAYMENTS AS A TAXDEDUCTION. So WILL OUR RECENT DEVALUATION. SO WILL OURLOWER TARIFFS. SO WILL OUR ABOLITION OF RADIO AND TELEVISIONLICENCE FEES. ALL THIS SHOULD BE OBVIOUS, BUT TOO OFTENTHESE THINGS ARE FORGOTTEN.
-8-WE ARE ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF FLUCTUATION INFARMERS' INCOMES. THESE FLUCTUATIONS CAUSE HARDHIPj,;AND UNCERTAINTY FOR MANY RURAL PRODUCERS. IN ADDITION TO THEPARTICULAR GOVERNMENT MEASURES I HAVE DESCRIBED, WHICH WILLRAISE LIVING STANDARDS IN ALL RURAL AREAS, WE ARE DETERMINEDTO DO WHAT WE CAN ABOUT INDIVIDUAL INCOME FLUCTUATIONS.I HAVE TODAY. ASKED THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION TOREPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT ON WHAT ASSISTANCE MAY BE NEEDED TOREDUCE THESE FLUCTUATIONS. THE INQUIRY WILL BE DETAILEDAND COMPREHENSIVE AND I AM CONFIDENT THAT CONSIDERABLESBENEFITS WILL FLOW FROM IT TO THE WHOLE FARMING COMMUNITY.WHEN I-SPOKE. TO YOU LAST YEAR I TOLD YOU THAT WE SAW THEI. A. C. AS THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR RATIONALISING AND, WHERE"' FCESSARY, AUGMENTING OUR ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRIES,SINl" THEN WE HAVE REFERRED MANY RURAL MATTERS TO THEI. A. C. FOR INQUIRY AND REPORT. IT WILL HELP YOU IF I LISTTHEM BRIEFLY: SUPERPHOSPHATE MANUFACTURING, MUSHROOMS,APPLES AND PEARS, DRIED VINE FRUITS, BOVINE BRUCELLOSIS,AND TUBERCULOSIS SLAUGHTER COMPENSATION cHEMES, RURALPROMOTION, RURAL RESEARCH, RURAL RECONSTRUCTION, DAIRYING,NEW LAiiD FARMS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA, NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERSSUBSIDY. THUS YO. "' ILL SEE THE STRENGTH AND SCOPE OF OUREFFORTS TO IMPROVE THEIR I-" PECTS OF OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES.I SHALL DEAL BRIEFLY" WITH OUR ACHIEVEMENTS INFOUR INDUSTRIES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE. .1/ 9
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE WOOL INDUSTRY DE TTEFALLING PRICES IS MORE SECURE TODAY AS A RESULT-. OFLABOR'S POLICIES, IN DECEMBER 1972 WE INHERITED MR. ANTHONY'SFLEXIBLE RESERVE PRICE SCHEME, Now THE LABOR GOVERNMENT' HAS DECIDED THAT THE WOOL INDUSTRY SHOULD BE PROTECTED BY AFLOOR PRICE. IT HAS BEEN FIXED AT THE EQUILAVENT OF 250CENTS A KILO CLEAN FOR THE FULL 1974-75' SEASON,. IN EFFECT,AUSTRALIAIS CUSTOMERS NOW KNOW THAT DURING THE CURRENTSEASON THEY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO BUY WOOL BELOW THAT PRICE.THIS WILL GIVE THEM CONFIDENCE IN THE AUCTION ROOM. THEY WILLKNOW THAT THE VALUE OF THEIR STOCKS WILL NOT FALL DRASTICALLYAND THAT COMPETITORS WILL PAY THE SAME BASIC PRICE FOR WOOLSUPPLIES AS THEY WILL. THE WOOLGROWER WILL HAVE GREATERCONFIDENCE IN THE INDUSTRY KNOWING THAT A FLOOR HAS BEENPLACED UNDER THE MARKET.IN ADDITION TO THE FLOOR PRICE MECHANISM, THEAUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION HAS BEEN AUTHORISED TO CONTINUETO OPERATE A FLEXIBLE RESERVE PRICE SCHEME WHEN MARKETVALUES ARE ABOVE 250 CENTS A KILO. IN OTHER WORDS, IF THEMARKET RATE IS ABOVE 250 CENTS AND A SLUMP SETS IN, THEDECLINE WILL BE SOFTENED WITH THE PRICE FALLING GRADUALLYUNTIL THE FIXED FLOOR IS REACHED,ON THE EVE OF THE BUDGET, THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED TOPROVIDE DIRECT LOANS TO THE AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION FORITS FLOOR PRICE OPERATIONS WHEN THE BANKS ARE UNABLE TO MAKEFUNDS AVAILABLE, IN EFFECT, THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS NOWPROVIDING ITS OWN FUNDS TO SUPPORT THE WOOL MARKET AND NOT) U T UARANTEEIN LQAN$ FROM THE BANKLNG .110
WE HAVE ALREADY INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO PROVIflE $ 150 MILLIONTO SUPPORT THE FLOOR PRICE.WE HAVE HELPED WHEATGROWERS IN POSITIVE ANDCONSTRUCTIVE WAYS. ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS Or THE GOVERNMENTWAS TO RECOGNISE THE VALIDITY OF WHEATGROWERS' CASE FOR ANINCREASED FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT, PARTICULARLY AT A TIMEWHEN STOCKS WERE AT AN ALL-TIME LOW. FOR THE FIRST TIME INFIFTEEN YEARS, THE FIRST'ADVANCE WAS ' INCREASED BY A SPECIALINCENTIVE PAYMENT OF 10 CENTS A BUSHEL. AT THE SAME TIME$THE GOVERNMENT AGREED TO APPLY THE INCREASED FIRST ADVANCETO A RECORD DELIVERY QUOTA OF 514 MILLION BUSHELS FOR 1973-74,WE ALSO INTRODUCED AN ADDITIONAL FLOATING POOL OFMILLION BUSHELS FOR STATES WHICH EXCEEDED THEIR QUOTA.FOR THE 1974-75 CROP, THE GOVERNMENT HAS ACCEPTED THERECOMMENDATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN WHEATGROWERS' FEDERATIONTHAT THE BASE QUOTA SHOULD REMAIN AT 514 MILLION BUSHELS.THE FLOATING POOL HAS BEEN INCREASED TO 74 MILLION BUSHELS.liH FIRST ADVANCE PAYMENT OF $ 1.20 PER BUSHEL WILL APPLY,IN ADDITION, AFTER NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE WHEATGROWERS'FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT, A NEW FIVE-YEAR STABILISATION,PLAN FOR THE WHEAT INDUSTRY HAS BEEN FORMULATEr. I EXPECTTHAT WE SHALL BE MAKING A FURTHER ANNOUNCEMENT THAT WILLENCOURAGE WHEATGROWERS LATER THIS WEEK. ./ li
S. 4;THE GOVERNMENT HAS SHOWN ITS CONCERN FOR THE MEAIINDUSTRY DESPITE STRONG PRESSURES FOR RESTRICTIONS ONTHE EXPORT OF MEAT, WE REFUSED TO INTERFERE WITH THENORMAL MARKET FORCES WHICH DETERMINE THE QUANTITIES OFMEAT RETAINED FOR THE DOMESTIC MARKET OR SENT FOR EXPORT.THIS DECISION WAS TAKEN IN THE BELIEF THAT IT WAS IN THEBEST LONG-TERM INTERESTS OF BOTH PRODUCER AND'CONSUMER.THE PROVISION OF OVER $ 1 MILLION TO COMPENSATE OWNERSOF REACTOR LIVESTOCK HAS ENABLED THE TUBERCULOSISERADICATION CAMPAIGN TO BE ACCELERATED, IN ADDITION TO'OUR PROPOSED ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY. THE GOVERNMENTWILL ESTABLISH A BUREAU OF ANIMAL HEALTH WITHIN THES. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. MR R. W. GEE HAS ALREADY:BEEN APPOINTED DIRECTOR OF THE BUREAU. IT IS ALSOPROPOSED TO SET UP A NATIONAL ANIMAL HEALTH ADVISORYCOUNCIL ALONG THE LINES OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH ANDMEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL. THERE IS A REAL NEED TOINTRODUCE A SINGLE MEAT INSPECTION SERVICE TO ELIMINATETHE DUPLICATION AND INEFFICIENCY THAT ARISES FROM THEPRESENT SYSTEM OF BOTH AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTSPROVIDING MEAT INSPECTION. DISCUSSIONS ARE BEING HELDWITH THE STATES TO TRY TO REACH AGREEMENT ON A-SINGLESERVICE TO COVER ALL MEAT PREPARED IN AUSTRALIA FORLOCAL OR OVERSEAS CONSUMPTION.
A'.-12-WE ARE BUILDING A STRONG EFFICIENT AND COMPETITIVE iSUGAR INDUSTRY THE GQVERNMENT HAS ALREADY ANNOUNCED THAT. IT WILL CONTINUE THE NITROGENOUS FERTILISER SUBSIDY AFTERDECEMBER 31 THIS YEAR TO ASSIST SPECIAWSED REGIONALeGROWTH AND TO ENSURE CONTINUEA. LOCAL FERTILISER. PRODUCTION.E. WANT TO ENSURE THAT AUSTRALiA IS NOT-AT THE MERCY FOVERSEAS. SUPPLIERS OF FERTILIZER. THE GOVERNMENT RECOGNISES',: THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS ASSISTANCE TO SUGAR PRODUCERS AND. THE HORTICULTURAL INDUSTRIES IN IRRIGATION AREAS WHERETHERE IS A NEED TO MAINTAIN A HIGH LEVE OF SOIL FERTILITY.9 1;i' IICITHE FRUIT GROWING INDUSTRY HAS PROBABLY SUFFEREDMORE THAN ANY OTHER RURAL INDUSTRY THROUGH RISING COSTSOF PRODUCTION, INCREASING FREIGHT RATES AND CONTRACTINGSMARKETS To ASSIST THE INDUSTRY THE GOVERNMENT MAINTAINEDSTA. 3LISATION ARRANGEMENTS FOR EXPORTS IN THE 1973 SEASONTHROUGH GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE OF $ 2.75 MILLION ITSALSO MADE iAAILABLE IN THE 1973 SEASON ABOUT $ 1.6 MILLION. TO HELP THE INDUSTRY ADJUST TO OUR REVALUATION OF THE 1AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR. FOR THE 1974 EXPORT SEASON, APARTFROM SUPPORT THROUGH STABILISATION, WE AGREED TO SUPPORTA TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT SCHEME FOR THE SHIFMENT OF APPLESTo EUROPE AND THL "' ITED KINGDOM,. WITH A FINANCIAL.COMMITMENT OF $ 2 MILLION. SiMILAR SCHEMES HAVE BEENAGREED TO WITH THE QUEENSLAND AND WESTERN AUSTRALIANS GOVERNMENTSe o / 13
-13THEY HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO GIVE THE INDUSTRY A BREATHINGS SPACE SO THAT NECESSARY RESTRUCTURING MEASURES CAN BESPUT INTO EFFECT, WE HAVE REPLACED THE APPLE AND PEARBOARD WITH THE AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION, WHICHWILL BE A SMALLER AND MORE EFFICIENT BODY WITH POWER TOTRADE IN ITS OWN RIGHT IN FRESH FRUIT AND PROCESSED FRUITPRODUCTS,. i A YEAR AT CURRENT PRICES.-YTHERE IS ANOTHER BROAD THEME RUNNING THROUGHOUR POLICIES AND IT IS THE BASIS OF ALL RURAL PROSPERITY.THAT IS THE ENLARGEMENT OF MARKETS. . OUR BASIC OBJECTIVE FORRURAL EXPORTS IS TO PROVIDE A FIRM AND LASTING BASISFOR INCREASED TRADE IN RURAL COMMODITIES. SINCE DECEMBER1972 THE GOVERNMENT HAS CONCLUDED MANY TRADE AGREEMENTSOF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO YOU AS FARMERS, I AM PROUD OFTHESE AGREEMENTS, I SHALL LIST THE MOST IMPORTANT OFTHEM. ' IN JULY 1973, WE SIGNED A TRADE AGREEMENT WITHCHINA IN WHICH THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT SUPPORTED THEPRINCIPLE OF LONG-TERM COMMODITY AGREEMENTS, AUSTRALIANRURAL PRODUCTS MENTIONED IN THE AGREEMENT INCLUDE WHEAT.AND OTHER GRAINS, SUGAR, WOOL. COTTON, TALLOW, HIDES ANDSKINS, BREEDING ANIMALS, PAPER AND PULP, A LONG TERMCONTRACT WAS NEGOTIATED WITH CHINA FOR UP TO 4.7 MILLIONTONNES OF WHEAT OVER A PERIOD OF THREE YEARS. AT CURRENTPRICES, THIS WOULD BE WORTH MORE THAN $ 600 MILLION. CHINAHAS ALSO SHOWN INTEREST IN LONG-TERM AGREEMENTS FOR OTHERCOMMODITIES, INCLUDING A SUGAR AGREEMENT WORTH $ 50 MILLION
144333 7c .1.13 3' I-TAI F3R A TRADE3GR**PRUDCTR. ANLI~. AIN AND-WOOL:AA 197 7RD.; SOOOT AiOLLtON 22 DECEMBERIA 1972, NOjATI00, ON E OFEWHEA VALUED.. A , ITON1-. M LITNR. AE REEMN WHSICH WAISS GEIN RLINE SA2L3E WHERTAHTIYS U~ AROENA LOG-MANY HASISHOWNEL'S INTTERR ESTO I4N RLOCNG$ FRASRLAPRDUTSINL4hN GA S A-TERM'..-AGREEMENTS, D, UIG MY VIIJSYA TEPILPIEA 193TETISIN TOAD AGRELKMENTAWSFLLED Y SUBSONGTANTIAPLISALOF SUGAR0 TONN" ES OFMIW6HENAT VALUED AT $ 5 MILLIHONR EAR POS* SIBLTEFRC FURTHER ALES OF WHEATIAN' SUAfNALN" MBSSDICUSINSOTHE SUPLLPIL. Y IS ALGOINTERESTE INMMLONG-STRAGMNISN CLDING MYETE ANDTI YOEAPREDITEP HLICES OGOVERNMEN EXPRSEO ITERT INIMORTNCATLE.3i
S IMPORTANT AS OUR MAJOR EXPORT MARKETS ARE, WEARE CONSCIOUS OF THE NEED TO AVOID TOO MUCH DEPENDENCE ONONE OR TWO MAJOR MARKETS FOR OUR PRIMARY PRODUCTS. TOFURTHER EXPAND MARKETS FOR AUSTRALIA'S PRIMARY PRODUCTS,THE GOVERNMENT WILL ESTABLISH AN OVERSEAS AGRICULTURALMARKETING SERVICE, . THE SERVICE WILL BE STAFFED BYEXPERIENCED MARKETING MEN IN KEY MARKETS OF THE WORLD ANDSUPPORTED BY THE NECESSARY FACILITIES IN AUSTRALIA,SITS ROLE WILL BE TO IDENTIFY AND MEASURE MARKETOPPORTUNITIES, PROVIDE MARKET INTELLIGENCE AND UP-TO-DATEINFORMATION ON LOCAL MARKET CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS,TO INVESTIGATE DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS, AND TO CO-ORDINATEPROMOTIONPROGRAMS, / 16A : TRADE AGREEMENT WAS CONCLUDED : WITHTHE L. SS.,. RS LAST YEAR WHICH LISTED MEAT. DAIRY PRODUCTS, GRAINS,FRUIT, SUGAR, HONEY, WINEf OILSEEDS AND WOOL AS POTENTIALFXPORTS, THE' ABOR GOVERNMENT IS MORE INVOLVED IN THEVITAL QUESTION OF MARKETING PRIMARY PRODUCTS THAN ANYS PREVIOUS ADMINISTRATION, WE BELIEVE A GOVERNMENT'S ROLEIN AGRICULTURE EXTENDS BEYOND STABILISATION SCHEMES INTOTHE FIELD OF HANDLING, TRANSPORTING AND SELLING THEPRODUCT, i
r 8-COM O A QUESTION OF. PARTICULAR INTEREST TOVTHE SMALL FARMER -THE FUTURE OF CO-OPERATIVES,S SHORTLY AFTWR'HE BECAME INISTER FOR PRIMARYINDUSTRY. KEN* WRI EDT CALLED FOR A REPORT ON THE ROLE, OFFARMER COOPERATIYES IN AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE, ' iE WASaTOLD THATi WITH A FEW EXCEPTIONS'THE CO-OPERATIVES WEREUNDERCAPITALISED AND FACING MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS, GENERALLYSPEAKING, THE CO-OPERATIVES, HAVE BEENUNABLE TO COMPETE WITH.,. FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORATIONS IN THE PROCESSING AND MARKETINGOF AGRICULTURALAND FOOD PRODUCTS, THE LABOR PARTY BELIEVESIN CO-OPERATIVES. WE BELIEVE THEY PROVIDE AN IDEAL FORM INWHICH FARMERS CAN MAXIMISE THEIR RETURNS AND ADJUST THEIR.PRODUCTION TO CHANGING CONSUMER NEEDS.FOR THESE REASONS WE BEGAN DISCUSSIONS WITH THECO-QPFRATIVE MOVEMENT ON WAYS OF ASSISTING THEM, AS ARESULT THE CO-0PERATIV FEDERATION. OF AUSTRALIA HAS DECIDEDTO ESTABLISH A SECRETARIAT IN CANBERRA i. iJ THE GOVERNMENT HASl... IED TO ESTABLISH A FARMER CO-OPERATIVE SERVIE WITHIN THEDEPARTML'T OF AGRICULTURE, THE FIRST TASI( KOF BOTH GROUPSWILL BE TO CO-O0PERATE'IN A MAJOR STUDY OF THE AIMS ANDOBJECTIVES OF FARMER CO-OPERATIVES IN AUSTRALIA.a. 1117./ 17: I j;-t ~ J : Sa. a-a. i. -' a a'. i.
-17-THE STUDY WILL LOOK AT THE LAWS AFFECTING COOPERATIVES1THEIR INFORMATION AND FINANCIAL NEEDS, METHODS OF IMPROVINGTHEIR-EFFICIENCY AND PROFITABILITY# THEIR MANAGEMENT TRAININGNEEDS AND OTHER MATTERS, THE BOVERNMENT SOUGHT TO HELPCO'OPERATIVES RAISE CAPITAL FOR NEW VENTURES BY EXPANDING THE'POWER'OF THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY D9VELOPMENT CORPORATION TO*'ENABLE IT TO ASSIST CO-OPERATIVES THIS INITIATIVE HAS BEEN. TWICE BLOCKED BY THE LIBERAL/ COUNTRY PARTIES IN THE SENATE,WE REAFFIRM OUR SUPPORT FOR THE CO-OPERATIVEMOVEMENT. GLADLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE PRESENCE TONIGHT OFSMR. JOHN BEYTAGH, THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NEWLY FORMEDAGRICULTURAL COMMITTEE OF THE CO-OPERATIVE FEDERATION OFAUSTRAL IA.' I -4S I1 r i Ii
I FE Pn) REASON WHY FARN' 67S SH'OULD LACK CONFIDENCEIN WhEIR FUTUR~ E UNIJEN A VYGOR iS ANDO G' 71AP-X GOVERNMENT.YOU CAN BlE SUrZE ThIAT MORE THAIJ A0 TXI GOES ON, THE.WORLD WILL NEED AND DEMAND YOUR PPRODUCTS. INITIALLY WEHAD TO T AKE GOME T OUGH DEC I S I GS I Tti I NT ER E 3TS 0OFEFFICIENCY AND. FAIRNESS, THE UFT! 0,7AL OF SON'-. YA4' CONCESSIONSAND SUBSIDIES LAST YEAR WAS UNPOPULAR WXTH ThIV FARtltlt-iCOMMUN17Y, WE DID N'OT EXPECT TO ZE POPULAR9 I SIMPLY ASK YOUTO REMEMBiER THAT THESE CONCLESSIOilS AND SUDSID1ES WERE NOT REALLYHELPING YOU. WE HAVE REPLACED THEM. WIT4$ MUCH NORE VALUABLEBENEFITS, YOUR LONG-TERM PROSPECTS ARE STRONGER IN CONSEQUENCE@...TiERE IS EVERY REASON TO HOPE THAT THE WORST DAYSFOR AUSTRALIAN FARMERS ARE OVER, TIE'SEVERE RECESSION OFTHE EARLY 70s NEED NOT HAPPEN1 AGAINv F'RIVID3ED WE ADOPT THERIGHT POLICIES Nt" Al PND FOR THE FUTURE. 1415. ER THE LABORGov~ maliaT WE19 HAVE SEEK' THE FIRST S iC--. 1ICAUT POST-WAR FALLFOR MANY~ J YEARS IN TH=-INDEBTEDNESS OF PJRA" L P11Z) UCERS,IN 1971 THEz BuREAU OF AGRICULY8' r. L ELgCsR EPORTED THAT'7,570 A JSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR AS . SISTANCE FROM THE RURALRECONSTMUCTION BOARD, THIS YEAR THE FIGURE IS T) OVJ' TO 523APPLICATION4SI OUR POLICIES TO RAISE THE LIVING S7ANDARDS OF ALLAUS. TRALIANS WILL ATTACK THE CRUCIAL PROLLEMS OF RURAL POVFRTY.VIE CAHNOT IGNORE THE CHILLING FACTS SHGWN IN THE INTERIM REPORTOF THE tOMSINO INQUIRY INTO0 PGVF rZT' THAT ONE IN FOURFAMILIES IN COUNTRY TOWNS LIVE IN POVERTY OR'NEAR-POVERTY,.1/ 19._ lnU-
THR9R MOR PORFMLEtNASRL ON YT NDTERMAIREE MORE OO FAMNIRL EN UALASCNRYI ATONAND PROSPEROUS AUSTRALIA, FAR( 4 INCOMES, DESPITF A RECENTDOWNTURN INWOOL AND PRICES, WII. L CONTINUE TO RISE, YOUR* MARKETS W I L4 CONT INUF, TO EXPANP, I? 4' KEN WRIEDT * t~ U HAVETHE ABLF. ST* BEST INF. ORMEP, MOST. ' ACTIVE AND IRTELLIGENTMINISTER EVER APPOINTED TO ADMINISTER P* RIMARY INDUSTRY.IN OUR RECENT.-GREEN PAPfR ON RURAL* INDUSTRY YOU HAVE THEBEST AND MOST COMPREHENSIVE BASIS FOR INFORMED. GOVERNMENTPOLICIES ON RURAL INDUSTRY EVER DRAWN UP IN AUSTRALIA,IN OUR INDUSTRIEs . ASSISTANCE COMMISSION YOU HAVE THE MOST.EXPERT'AND FFFICIENT INSTRUMENT FOR GUARANTEEING T* HE STRENGTH* AND STABILITY OF. OUR RURAL INDUSTRIES EVER APPOINTED IN* AUSTRALIA. ALLTHESE TH4IQS PROVIDE FIRM GROUNDS FOR*. CONFIDENCE AND FAITH IN THE FUTURE. -3oNOBT3E TAKEN INiBY THE PROPAGANDA OF OUR OPPONENTS, OUR POLICIES AREflSIGNED TO ENSURE THAT ALL POSSIBLE MARK~ ETS ARE OBTAINED FOR* CUR PRIMARY EXPORTS* THAT MARKETING SYSTEMS ARE EFFICIENT,* THAT PKR ' UCTS GROWN ARE THOSE IN DEMAND, THAT OUR FARMERSIlCREASE ' THEIR ALRL.-Y HIGH LEVgLS OF EFFICIENCY AND THATALL AUSTRALIANS IN RURAL Aiii.. ENJOY EDUCATIONAL, hlEALTH#.AND LIVING STANDARDS EQUAL. TO ANY IN AUSTRALIA AND A~ NY INTHE* WORLD.


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G. WHITLAM, M. P.,TO THE R. S. L. NATIONAL CONGRESS, MELBOURNE.,TUESDAY 29 OCTOBER 1974,IN OUR 22 MONTHS OF OFFICE AUSTRALIA'SREPATRIATION SYSTEM HAS BEEN UNDER CONTINUING REVIEW ANDHAS UNDERGONE CONTINUING REMODELLING., VENTURE TOSAY THAT NEVER BEFORE HAS A GOVERNMENT ADOPTED SOPROMPTLY SO MANY PROPOSALS ORIGINATING IN THE FORM* OFRESOLUTIONS FROM THE R. S. L. NATIONAL CONGRESS. WE HAVEBEEN CONCERNED, OF COURSE, TO SEE THAT THOSE ELIGIBLEFOR CASH BENEFITS ARE NOT DISADVANTAGED BY INFLATION.THESE PAYMENTS HAVE MORE THAN KEPT PACE WITH RISES INTHE COST OF LIVING. MOREOVER, WE HAVE BEEN CONCERNEDTO WIDEN ELIGIBILITY FOR THE WHOLE RANGE OF EXISTINGBENEFITS TO CREATE NEW BENEFITS AND TO EASE THEQUALIFICATIONS FOR THEM.
SPECIAL RATE PENSIONSephrnber 1972 $ 48.00Novejiiihr .974 64A 1 0Increase 33.5%INTERMEDIATE RATE PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 34.00Novemiiber 1.974 44.1-6Increase 31.0%GENERAL RATE PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 14.00November 1974 25.00Increase 78.5%WAR WIDOW'S PENSIONSeptember 1972 $ 20.00August 1974 31.00Increase DOMESTIC ALLOWANCESeptember 1972 8.50November 1974 $ 12.00Increase 41.2%
WAR PENSIONS:Special rate T PIIntermediate rateGeneral rate ( 100 percent)War Widows PensionDcmestic Allo: anceSERVICE PENSIONS:Single RateMarried Rate Pension Pension ( Dec) Pension Pension ( Sept) Pension Pension% ( JunAWE ( Dec) AWE ( June) A. W. E. ( J u n48.00 34.0014.00 20.00 8.5020.00 34.50 47.95 33.97 13.99 19.98 8.4919.98 34.47 64.100 44.550 25.000 31.00 12.000 31.00 51.50 50.75 35.27 19.79 24.54 9.5024.54 40.78 60 41 22 26 926 45 .10 .05. .00 .00 .50 .00 .50 47.59 32.5.0 17.42 20.59 7.5220.59 36.03A. W. E. Seasonally Adjusted figure for June 1974 used latestavailable0 Budget Item 197428/ 10/ 74 DEC. 1972JUNE 1974
-4-NEW BENEFITS INCLUDE:-ABOLITION OF THE MEANS TEST FOR ALLVETERANS OVERALL SERVICE PENSIONERS HAVE 25% OFTHEIR WAR SERVICE PENSIONS DISREGARDEDWHERE THE MEANS TEST STILL APPLIES.REPATRIATION PENSIONS PAYABLE INANY OVERSEAS COUNTRY.ALL COMMONWEALTH EX-SERVICEMENELIGIBLE FOR REPATRIATION BENEFITS.( GOVERNMENT NOW ACTIVELY CONSIDERINGEXTENSION TO ALL ALLIED PERSONNEL.)FREE MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENTFOR ANY CONDITION FOR ALL ANDFOR ALL AUSTRALIAN VETERANS IRRESPECTIVEOF AREA OF SERVICE.REPATRIATION TREATMENT BENEFITS*EXTENDED TO ALL VETERANS OF BOER AND WORLDWAR I, INCLUDING NURSING HOME CARE.DEFENCE SERVICE. HOMES MAXIMUM LOANINCREASED TO $ 15,000.
THE SAME PROCESS OF CONTINUING REVIEW APPLIES ITO SERVING PERSONNEL. IN OUR EFFORTS TO BUILD TRULYPROFESSIONAL FORCES AND TO ENSURE THAT ARMED SERVICE ISMADE AS ACCEPTABLE AS ANY OTHER PROFESSION IN THECOMMUNITY THERE HAS BEEN A CONTINUING REVIEW OF SERVICESALARIES AND CONDITIONS. THESE INCLUDE:THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KERR/ WOODWARDCOMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVEDRATES OF PAY AND GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE$SINCE THE TIME RATES OF PAY WEREREVISED AS A CONSEQUENCE OF THE KERR/ WOODWARD COMMITTEERECOMMENDATIONS, I. E. 8/ 9 FEBRUARY, 1973, SALARIES HAVEBEEN INCREASED AS SHOWN IN THE FOLLOWING EXAMPLES:.PRIVATE PAY LEVEL 1 $ 1,628 OR 48.96%WARRANT OFFICER 1 $ 2,390 OR 30.08%LIEUTENANT ( MAXIMUMOF SALARY RANGE) $ 1,860 OR 32.92%COLONEL ( MAXIMUM OFSALARY RANGE) $ 3,042 OR 22.12%
-6-THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW MACHINERY TOSPEED UP THE DETERMINATION OF SALARIES AND RELATEDCONDITIONS$ THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDEPENDENTCOMMITTEE OF REFERENCE FOR DEFENCE FORCES PAY, TOPROVIDE EXPERT GUIDANCE ON PAY MATTERS.CE) THE EXTENSION OF THE BENEFITS UNDERTHE DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES ACT TO ALL MEMBERS OF THEPERMANENT FORCES WHO HAVE AT LEAST THREE YEARS' SERVICE.IMPROVEMENT OF THE RANGE OF SETTLEMENTBENEFITS. THE EXTENSION OF REPATRIATION BENEFI-TSTO PROV. IDE ENTITLEMENT WITHOUT WAR SERVICE.THE INTRODUCTION OF A TAX-FREERE-ENGAGEMENT BONUS OF $ 1, OOO PAYABLE TO OTHER RANKS WHO-ENGAGE FOR A FURTHER THREE YER SERVICE ONCOMPLETION OF AN INITIAL SIX YEARS' SERVICE.THE APPOINTMENT OF A DEFENCE FORCEOMBUDSMAN WHEN THE APPROPRIATE LEGISLATION IS APPROVED$THE INTRODUCTION OF AN ANNUAL LEAVE BONUSSCHEME TO OPERATE ON THE SAM E LINES AS THE COMPARABLESCHEME FOR AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYEES.


LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENTSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, QC, M. P.,OPENING THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OFLOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS, AT ALICE SPRINGS, ON MONDAY11 NOVEMBER, 1974.THERE IS A SYMBOLISM ABOUT THIS GATHERING WHICHONE MAY FIND FASCINATING OR FRIGHTENING ACCORDING TO ONE'SPREJUDICESx AUSTRALIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS AT LAST COMETO THE CENTREX WHEN YOU CHOOSE NOT ONLY TO MEET IN THECENTRE, BUT HAVE THE LUCIFER OF CENTRALISM OPEN YOURCONFERENCE AND HAVE YOUR MEETING ON AN AUSTRALIAN TERRITORYTHEN THE PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND MIGHT WELL WONDER WHAT THEWORLD IS COMING TOK I, NATURALLY AND BY CONTRAST, FINDBOTH YOUR CHOICES THE VENUE AND THE OPENING SPEAKERWELCOME AND GRATIFYINGX IN THE LIGHT OF THE NORTHERNTERRITORY ELECTIONS IT MIGHT BE EXCESSIVE TO SAY THAT I MEETYOU ON HOME TERRITORY; BUT IT IS AT LEAST NEUTRAL GROUND,AND FOR ALL OF US AS FAR AS THE WARMTH OF THE WELCOME OFTHE PEOPLE OF ALICE SPRINGS ON THIS OCCASION IS CONCERNEDFRIENDLY GROUNDx
THIS CONFERENCE ITSELF IS ANOTHER LANDMARK ONTHE RAPID MARCH TO MATURITY TOWARDS PARTNERSHIP INTHE FEDERAL SYSTEM WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS MADE INRECENT YEARS VERY RECENT YEARSx IT HAPPENS TO BE JUSTTWO YEARS THIS WEEK THAT I DELIVERED THE POLICY SPEECHON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY FOR THE 1972ELECTIONSX IT WAS NO ACCIDENT THAT THE LENGTHIEST ANDMOST DETAILED SECTION OF THAT DOCUMENT DEALT DIRECTLY WITHCITIES* CENTRES, REGIONS, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THESOCIAL, FINANCIAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTIONS ASSOCIATEDWITH THEMA IT WAS NO ACCIDENT IN EITHER PERSONAL ORPOLITICAL TERMS. FROM THE TIME I WAS ELECTED TO THENATIONAL PARLIAMENT TWENTY-TWO YEARS AGO AT THE END OFTHIS MONTH I REFUSED TO ACCEPT WHAT WAS THEN THECONVENTIONAL WISDOM THAT THE SOLE OR CHIEF CONCERNS OF THENATIONAL PARLIAMENT SHOULD BE FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFENCE, THEANNUAL BUDGET AND THE LEVEL OF THE MAJOR SOCIAL WELFAREPAYMENTSx POLITICALLY, IT SEEMED OBVIOUS THAT A PARTY OFSOCIAL REFORM, SUCH AS OURS PROFESSED TO BE, EMASCULATEDITSELF BY ACCEPTING THESE LIMITATIONS AND PREOCCUPATIONSXIT COULD NEVER GET ANYWHERE UNLESS IT RECOGNISED, AS ANATIONAL PARTY, THE NEED FOR NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT BY THENATIONAL GOVERNMENT THROUGH THE NATIONAL PARLIAMENT INTHE CONCERNS OF THE PEOPLE OVER THE WHOLE RANGE OF POLICYTHEIR SCHOOLS, THEIR CITIES, THEIR HOSPITALS, THEIRCULTURE, THEIR RECREATION, THEIR IMMEDIATE ENVIRONMENT, ANDPROVIDING ACCESS TO JOBS, SHOPS AND RECREATIONS) ,3/
AND IN ALL THESE AREAS I SAW IT TO BE NECESSARY ANDINESCAPABLE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT MUST PLAY A FULLPART AS A FULL PARTNER WITHIN THE FEDERAL SYSTEM,I FOUGHT TO HAVE THE VIEW ACCEPTED BY MY PARTY ANDINCORPORATED IN ITS PLATFORM I FOUGHT SUCCESSFULLY,I THEN FOUGHT TO HAVE THAT: VIEW ACCEPTED BY THEAUSTRALIAN ELECTORATEX I FOUGHT SUCCESSFULLY I HAVESINCE FOUGHT TO HAVE THAT VIEW INCORPORATED IN THELEGISLATION AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THIS NATIONA IHAVE HAD SOME SUCCESSES AND SOME FAILURESX I HAVE NOTYET FINISHED THAT FIGHT WHEN AS LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTYI BEGAN TO BRING LOCAL QUESTIONS TO THE CENTRE OF THENATIONAL DEBATE I CAME IN FOR SOME " CHIACKING" x I EVENHAD THE POOR TASTE TO SUGGEST THAT SEWERAGE WAS ANATIONAL PROBLEM IN FACT A NATIONAL ISSUEX I REMEMBERTHE THEN PRIME MINISTER, JOHN GORTON, ACCUSED ME OFTALKING LIKE A SHIRE PRESIDENTx I ACCEPTED THE SOFTIMPEACHMENT I THOUGHT IT GOOD COMPANY TO BE INx IFIND IT GOOD COMPANY TO BE IN TODAYx IRONICALLYMR. GORTON HIMSELF IS NOW DEEMED AN EVEN MORE FEROCIOUSCENTRALIST THAN IX THE FACT IS THAT THE APPROACH I TAKETO NATIONAL AFFAIRS OWES NOTHING TO ANY DOCTRINE CALLED" CENTRALISM", IF SUCH A DOCTRINE THERE BEX
IT IS SCARCELY EVEN " SOCIALISM", IF SOCIALISM BE DEFINEDAS BERNARD SHAW AND THE WEBBS DID AND THEY WERE THEPIONEERS OF MODERN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS " THE INEVITABILITYOF GRADUALISM" K I AM RATHER ENTITLED TO DESCRIBE WHAT IHAVE BEEN ADVOCATING, DEFINING, AND RE-DEFINING OVER A LONGTWENTY-TWO YEARS AND MORE, AS HAVING BEEN THE GRADUALISMOF INEVITABILITY, FOR IT IS INEVITABLE, GIVEN AUSTRALIA'SNATURE AND SITUATION, THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUSTACCEPT GREATER INVOLVEMENT IN ALL THESE MATTERS WHICH WEREONCE DEEMED TO BE THE SOLE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATES OROF LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THE RESULT OF THAT OLD APPROACH WASTHAT THE FUNCTIONS WHICH A MODERN COMMUNITY REQUIRES SHOULDBE PERFORMED THROUGH ITS ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES WERE EITHERDONE INADEQUATELY OR NOT DONE AT ALL, WERE FINANCEDINADEQUATELY AND UNFAIRLY OR NOT FINANCED AT ALLx IT ISINEVITABLE THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT INCREASINGRESPONSIBILITY TO FINANCE THESE FUNCTIONS FAIRLY ANDADEQUATELYx WHAT I HAVE TRIED TO DO, WHAT THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT HAS TRIED TO DO, IS TO CREATE THE INSTITUTIONSAND MACHINERY AND TO APPOINT THE MEN AND WOMEN WHEREBYTHIS INEVITABLE RESPONSIBILITY CAN BE DISCHARGEDEFFICIENTLY AND FAIRLYxTO THE EXTENT THAT THE POLICY SPEECH OF 1972INCORPORATED THESE CONCEPTS IT MIGHT BE REGARDED ASSOMETHING OF A POLITICAL TESTAMENTx
IT MAY BE THAT HAD WE NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL AT THE ELECTIONSBEFORE LAST, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN MY LAST TESTAMENTX BUT* IT IS USEFUL TO LOOK BACK ON THAT DOCUMENT AND SEE HOW FARTHE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ACHIEVE WHAT ITSET OUT TO DO FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE PEOPLE FORWHOM LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS SO GREAT A RESPONSIBILITYXI EXPLAINED OUR GENERAL APPROACH IN THIS WAY:" EVEN THE MOST ENLIGHTENED AND EQUAL APPROACH TOSOCIAL WELFARE CAN ONLY SCRATCH THE SURFACE OF THE BASICPROBLEM OF EQUALITY AND WELL-BEING OF MOST OF OUR CITIZENSXWE CAN DOUBLE AND TREBLE SOCIAL BENEFITS, BUT WE CAN NEVERMAKE UP THROUGH CASH PAYMENTS FOR WHAT WE TAKE AWAY INMENTAL AND PHYSICAL WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL COHESION THROUGHTHE BREAK-DOWN OF COMMUNITY LIFE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITYINCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING, THEHEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY, HIS CHILDREN'SOPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HISACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO ENJOYTHE NATION'S RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND CULTURE, HISABILITY TO PARTICIPATE-IN THE DECISIONS AND ACTIONS OF THECOMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT BY THEHOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVESx THIS IS WHYLABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST INVOLVEITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES AND CENTRES WHERE MOST PEOPLE LIVEA
PRACTICALLY EVERY MAJOR NATIONAL PROBLEM RELATES TOCITIEsx A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT WHICH CUTS ITSELF OFFFROM RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE NATION'S CITIES IS CUTTINGITSELF OFF FROM THE NATION'IS REAL LIFEx A NATIONALGOVERNMENT WHICH HAS NOTHING TO SAY ABOUT CITIES HASNOTHING RELEVANT OR ENDURING TO SAY ABOUT THE NATIONOR THE NATION'IS FUTUREy LABOR IS NOT A CITY-BASEDPARTYx IT IS A PEOPLE-BASED PARTY, AND THE OVERWHELMINGMAJORITY OF OUR PEOPLE LIVE IN CITIES AND TOWNS ACROSSOUR NATIONX I ITHEN OUTLINED SPECIFIC PROPOSALsKr THEY WERE:TO ESTABLISH A MINISTRY OR URBAN AND REGIONALDEVELOP ME N TTo SET UP LAND COMMISSIONS TO BUY SUBSTANTIALTRACTS OF LAND IN NEW AREAS BEING OPENED UPFOR HOUSING AND TO LEASE OR SELL AT COST FULLYSERVICED BLOCKS)(To MAKE DIRECT GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR URBANPUBLIC TRANSPORTxTO ASK THE PRINCIPAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITIESWHAT AUSTRALIAN GRANTS IN THAT FINANCIAL YEAR WOULDENABLE THEM TO EMBARK PROMPTLY AND ECONOMICALLY ONAN UNINTERRUPTED PROGRAM TO PROVIDE SERVICES TOTHE PREMISES IN THEIR AREAS BY 1978, K 1 37/ 0
To MAKE DIRECT REPRESENTATION FOR LOCALGOVERNMENT A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATIONBY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AT THEPROPOSED CONSTITUTION CONVENTION OF 1973ATO AMEND THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT TOAUTHORISE THE COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTOAND REPORT UPON APPLICATION FOR AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT GRANTS BY ANY LOCAL GOVERNMENTAUTHORITY OR GROUP OF AUTHORITIES, PREFERABLYON A REGIONAL OR DISTRICT BASISXTo SECURE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT A VOICE ANDA VOTE ON THE LOAN COUNCIL,WITH ONE NOTABLE EXCEPTION, THESE UNDERTAKINGSHAVE ALL BEEN FULFILLED IN WHOLE OR PARTx IN HIS ANNUALREPORT YOUR PRESIDENT MR GUERIN REFERS VERY GENEROUSLY TOTHESE ACHIEVEMENTS,. PROPERLY, HE DESCRIBES THE AMENDEDGRANTS COMMISSION LEGISLATION, THE SUBSEQUENT REPORT OFTHE GRANTS COMMISSION AND THE ACCEPTANCE BY THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT OF ITS RECOMMENDATIONS AS THE MOST SIGNIFICANTACHIEVEMENT THIS YEARA AS A RESULT OF THE FIRST REPORTWE HAVE AUTHORISED PAYMENT OF NEARLY $ 56 MILLION ($ 56,3' 45,000)TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIESA THE 806 AUTHORITIES WHICHBENEFIT COMPRISE 92 PER CENT OF ALL WHO APPLIED FORFINANCIAL ASSISTANCEA : 8' A
THE GRANTS RANGE FROM $ 3,000 TO $ 2 MILLION FOR THELARGEST AND MOST POPULOUS COUNCIL AREA IN AUSTRALIABRISBANEx I EMPHASISE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTACCEPTED THE COMMISSION'S RECOMMENDATION THAT THEGRANTS ARE MADE WITHOUT CONDITIONS ON THE MANNER INWHICH THEY ARE SPENT BY THE RECEIVING AUTHORITYx I ALSOEMPHASISE THAT THE NEW FUNDS SHOULD IN NO WAY BE ASUBSTITUTE FOR REVENUE NORMALLY RAISED BY COUNCILS BYLONG ESTABLISHED MEANS SUCH AS RATES AND CHARGES FORSERVICES NOR REPLACE ASSISTANCE NORMALLY PROVIDED BYSTATE GOVERNMENTSK As YOU WILL BE WELL AWARE, OUR CHIEF OBJECTIVEIS EQUALISATION OF SERVICES WITHIN REGIONSx WE HAVELEGISLATED TO ENABLE THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO PROMOTESTANDARDS AS BETWEEN REGIONS IN A WAY WHICH IT HAD ONLYBEEN ABLE TO DO, FROM ITS CREATION IN 1933, AS BETWEENTHE STATESY, THE GREAT INEQUALITIES IN AUSTRALIA NOWLIE NOT BETWEEN THE STATES BUT BETWEEN REGIONS WITHINTHE STATE BOUNDARIESX I BELIEVE THE NEW WORK OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION,AS IT UNFOLDS, WILL PROMOTE ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT OFPROFOUND SIGNIFANCE TO THE SHAPE, IMPORTANCE ANDEFFECTIVENESS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTX I REFER TO THECREATION OF REGIONS AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF GENUINEREGIONAL THINKINGX 9/,
THE CREATION OF APPROVED REGIONAL ORCANISATIONS FOR THEPURPOSES OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION ACT IS NOW ALMOSTCOMPLETEX So FAR THERE ARE 74 APPROVED REGIONALORGANISATIONS) IN THE FIRST YEAR OF OPERATION OF THENEW ACT ONLY THIRTEEN LOCAL GOVERNING BODIES EITHERDECLINED TO ACCEPT MEMBERSHIP OF ANY REGIONAL ORGANISATIONOR DID NOT SEEK ANY FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE THROUGH THEGRANTS COMMISSION, THIS NUMBER HAS ALREADY BEEN REDUCEDAND WE LOOK FORWARD TO A VIRTUAL 100 PER CENT PARTICIPATIONXTHE SPIRIT IN WHICH INDIVIDUAL LOCAL AUTHORITIES ENTER INFOTHE REGIONAL PROGRAM IS, OF COURSE, A MATTER FOR THEIRDECISIONK I DO SUGGEST, HOWEVER, THAT AN IMAGINATIVEAPPROACH TO THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION, INVOLVING PARTICIPATIONNOT ONLY OF THE CONSTITUENT COUNCILS BUT OF THE REGIONALCOMMUNITY, WILL PROVIDE A MAJOR STEP TOWARDS BETTER REGIONS,BETTER LOCAL GOVERNMENT, BETTER COOPERATION BETWEEN FEDERALAND STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND BETTERo HAPPIER COMMUNITIESAAT-PRESENT THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION$ CONSIST SOLELY OFREPRESENTATIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THE FUTURE STRUCTUREAND DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS IS NOT SOMETHINGTHAT SHOULD BE FEARED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BECAUSE IT IS AMATTER LARGELY FOR COMPONENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIESTHEMSELVES TO DETERMINEx THEY CAN IF THEY CHOOSE LEAVETHE REGIONAL ORGANISATION AS NOTHING MORE THAN A DEVICE FORMAKING APPLICATION TO THE GRANTS COMMISSIONX
I DO BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT EXPERIENQE WILL DEMONSTRATETHE ADVANTAGES OF REGIONAL CONSULTATION AND COOPERATIONIN A NATION WHICH HAS HITHERTO HAD FAR ' 00 FEW GENUINEREGIONS AND FAR TOO MANY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES; FARTOO LITTLE REGIONALISM AND FAR TOO MUCH PAROCHIALISMXI MENTIONED THAT THERE WAS ONE GREAT EXCEPTIONIN OUR EFFORTS TO FULFIL THE PROGRAM FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTOUTLINED TWO YEARS AGOx NOT, YOU WILL BELIEVE ME, FORWANT OF TRYINGX I REFER OF COURSE TO OUR EFFORTS TOSECURE A VOICE AND A VOTE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THELOAN COUNCILx IN THE 1972 POLICY SPEECH I SAID: " LETTHERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT OUR DETERMINATION TO MAKE LOCALGOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMX IN1927 WHEN THE FIRST FINANCIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THECOMMONWEALTH AND STATES ESTABLISHED THE LOAN COUNCILSEMI-GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEBTS WERE A MEREFRACTION OF STATE DEBTSx Now SEMI-GOVERNMENT AND LOCALAUTHORITIES HAVE TO FIND AS LARGE SUMS AS THE STATEGOVERNMENTS FOR THE REPAYMENT OF LOANS AND PAYMENT OF INTERESTJIT WOULD BE INCONCEIVABLE, IF THE FINANCIAL AGREEMENT WEREBEING DRAWN UP NOW, FOR THE SEMI AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTALAUTHORITIES TO BE COMPLETELY IGNOREDA AT PRESENT ON THELOAN COUNCIL EACH STATE HAS ONE VOTE AND THE COMMONWEALTHHAS TWO VOTES AND A CASTING VOTE)( WE PROPOSE THAT ATNEXT YEARIS CONVENTION THE LOAN COUNCIL BE RESTRUCTURED TOCONSIST OF ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM EACH STATE GOVERNMENT,ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ALDERMEN AND COUNCILLORS IN EACHSTATE CHOSEN PY THEM AND FOUR REPRESENTATIVES OF THECOMMONWEALTH4
III" IT WILL THEN BE POSSIBLE FOR THE COMMONWEALTH. ONREQUEST. TO RAISE APPROVED LOANS QN BEHALF OF SEMIGOVERNMENTAND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES* THUSGIVING THEM TH9 ADVANTAGE OF THE LONGER PERIOD ANDLOWER INTEREST APPERTAINING TO THE LOANS RAISED BYTHE COMMONWEALTH ON BEHALF OF THE STATgS."I DON'T SUPPOSE I HAVE TO FOLLOW THROUGH THESTORY IN DETAIL% AT THE CONVENTION IN SYDNEY INSEPTEMBER 1973 1 DID SECURE SOME SORT OF AGREEMENT ORAT LEAST I THOUGHT I HAD SECURED IT FROM THE PREMIERSXAT LEAST THEY AGREED TO DISCUSS THE PROPOSAL AND WHENTHEY CAME TO CANBERRA ON 11 OCTOBER 1973 1 EXPECTED TOMAKE REAL PROGRESSK I HAVE TO SAY THAT WITH ONEEXCEPTION THE PREMIERS DID LITTLE MORE THAN REINFORCEEACH OTHERS I PREJUDICES IN FAVOUR OF THE STATUS QUOxREGRETTABLY THE ONE EXCEPTION IS NO LONGER A PREMIER.THEIR ARGUMENTS BOILED DOWN TO TWO: THAT THE PRESENCEOF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE LOAN COUNCIL WOULD MAKE THATBODY UNWIELDY IF NOT UNWORKABL~ E, PARTICULARLY AS LOCALGOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVES WOULD LACK THE KNOW-HOW TOGRAPPLE WITH THESE PROBLEMS OF BORROWINGS, DEBTS, INTERESTAND FUNDING; AND SECONDLY, AL. L THAT WAS NECESSARY FORTHE SOLUTION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROBLEMS WAS FOR THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE MORE MONEY FOR THE STATESgIN OTHER WORDS, THE SAME SYSTEM1 THE SAME SET-UP# WHICHHAS SO MANIFESTLY FAILED, SHOULD BE CONTINUEDX 12/.
12,I DO NOT THINK ANY LXI" LIIENCE SINCE I UECAME PRIMMINISTER HAS SO COMPLETELY UPHELD THE ASSERTION I USEDTO MAKE AS LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION THAT THE STATESWHO COMPLAIN OF STARVATION FROM CANIERRA ARE INSENSITIVETO THE NEEDS OF THEIR OWN CREATIONSx I NEXTSOUGHT TOACHIEVE OUR OBJECT IN THE ONLY WAY OPEN BY REFERENDUM,BY GOING TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA, I DO NOT HIDEFROM YOU MY DISAPPOINTMENT AT THE REJECTION OF THATREFERENDUMA IN A SENSE, I SUPPOSE IT MAY BE REGARDEDAS ONE OF THE CASUALITIES OF THE ELECTION FORCED UPON USIN MAYX THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR NO WAS A MARVEL OFMISREPRESENTATIONK THE PROPOSAL WAS TERMED A " MONEYBRIBE" IT CLAIMED: " IMAGINE THE MACHINERY WHICHWOULD BE NECESSARY TO EXAMINE THE AFFAIRS OF 1,000MUNICIPALITIES AND TO DECIDE WHICH ONES WERE DOING WHAT,WHY THEY WERE DOING IT, HOW THEY WERE DOING IT, WHETHERTHEY NEEDED ASSISTANCE, IF SO WHAT ASSISTANCE AND HOWMUCH" IN OTHER WORDS, THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR No WASACTUALLY ATTACKING THE WORK ALREADY UNDERTAKEN BY THEGRANTS COMMISSION/., IT DELIBERATELY CONFUSED THELOAN COUNCIL AND THE GRANTS COMMISSIONA DESPITE THECONFUSION, DESPITE THE FIELD-DAY FOR ALL THE NAY-SAYERS1THE PROPOSAL RECEIVED A VERY HIGH LEVEL OF PUBLIC SUPPORT4THE INTERESTING FEATURE IS THAT THE SIZE OF THE YES VOTE WASIN DIRECT PROPORTION TO THE SIZE OF THE STATE THE LARGERTHE STATE THE LARGER THE YES VOTE. 131,
13.BY STATES THE RESULTS WERE: yu NN W SOUTH WALES 50-79 49.21VICTORIA 47.38 52,62QUEENSLAND 43.68 56.32SOWTH AUSTRALIA 42.52 57.48WESTERN AUSTRALIA 40.67 59.33TASMANIA 40.00 60.00AUSTRALIA 46.85 53,15WHATEVER THE PRESENT OUTLOOK ON THIS OR ANYOTHER MATTER AFFECTING LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AMDETERMINED TO CARRY OUT THE FUNDAMENTAL PLEDGE I GAVEIN 1972 THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL BE MADE A FULLPARTNER IN OUR FEDERAL SYSTEMXk THE GRANTS COMMISSIONACT. is OBVIOUSLY A BIG STEP FORWARDA., THE REJECTION SOFAR OF OUR EFFORTS FOR REPRESENTATION ON THE LOANCOUNCIL IS OBVIOUSLY A SET-BACK,~ YET WE ARE ACHIEVINGTHE BASIC OBJECTIVE PARTNERSHIP IN THE FEDERAL SYSTEMIN MANY WAYS)( WE ARE DOING THIS BY INVOLVING LOCALGOVERNMENT CLOSELY IN MANY OF OUR MOST SIGNIFICANTPROGRAMS, IN 1973 WE INSTITUTED TRIAL AREA IMPROVEMENTPROGRAMS INVOLVING SPENDING OF $ 8 MILLION IN THE SYDNEYAND MELBOURNE WESTERN REGIONSx, THIS YEAR THERE WILL BETHI. RTEEN AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS OPERATING WITH ASPENDING OF $ 14 MILLIONA&amp; ? 1
14.LAST YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 28 MILLION UNDER OURNATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM, THIS YEAR THE ESTIMAIE IS$ 105 MILLION AND THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN EXTENDED TO TOWNSWITH A POPULATION OF MORE THAN 10,000FOR THE FIRST TIME WE HAVE MADE URBAN LOCALROADS ELIGIBLE FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THEAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION ANDOTHER AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENTS SUCH AS DEPARTMENT OFURBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ARE CONSULTING AT LOCALLEVEL ON THE RECREATIONAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLEx OURGRANTS PROGRAM HAS MADE A START TOWARDS MEETING THOSE NEEDSAWE HAVE THIS YEAR ALLOCATED $ 2.25 MILLION FOR GRANTS FORLOCAL TOURIST ATTRACTIONS AND FACILITIESx WE AREESTABLISHING ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR CONSULTATION WITHLOCAL GOVERNMENT, REGIONAL TOURIST ORGANISATIONS ANDINDUSTRY REPRESENTATIVES TO PLAN REGIONAL TOURISTDEVELOPMENTX WE HAVE EXPANDED THE PROGRAM OF LOCALOWNERSHIP OF AERODROMES.
LOCAL GOVERN4MENT HAS PARTICIPATED IN THEINTERIM PROGRAM FOR PRE-SCHOOL AND CHILD-CARESERVICES,, ABOUT HALF OF THE 122 CAPITAL PROJECTSUNDERTAKEN THROUGH OUR CHILD-CARE PROGRAM WERESPONSORED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES) PROJECTS DEVELOPED, PROGRESS PAYMENTS WERE MADEDIRECT TO THESE AUTHORITIESx ONCE THE PROJECTS WEREWELL UNDERWAY RECURRENT GRANTS WERE PAID TO THEMANAGEMENT BODIES WHICH USUALLY INCLUDE LOCAL GOVERNMENTREPRESENTAT IONXWE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE MORE THAN MILLIONIN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES FORABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT IN THE PAST YEARX MOST OF THATWAS ALLOCATED UNDER THE SPECIAL WORK PROJECTS SCHEMEADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIESX MAY SAYTHAT, IN GENERAL, WE HAVE BEEN VERY SATISFIED WITH THEADMINISTRATION OF THE GRANTS AND I APPRECIATE THESPIRIT IN WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS ENTERED INTO THEPROGRAMA WE HAVE COOPERATED CLOSELY WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENTTHROUGH THE CREATION OF THE REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIALD EVELOPMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIANASSISTANCE PLANA
16.THE LEGISLATION FOR THE -OSPITALS AND HEALTHSERVICES COMMISSION PROVIDES FOR THE COMMISSIONMAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO BEMADE AVAILABLE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCALGOVERNMENTS AFTER CONSULTATIONS WITH THE STATESA THECOMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM AND THE COMMUNITY MENTAL HEATHOALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY PROGRAM, BOTH INTRODUCEDIN 1973, PROVIDE FOR DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTORGANISATIONS* LOCAL GOVERNMENT NOW HAS AN OPPORTUNIlYTO PARTICIPATE DIRECTLY IN THE PROVISION OF A WIDE RANGEOF HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES AT THE COMMUNITYLEVEL, WHERE ITS PARTICIPATION CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVEAWE HAVE BEEN GRATIFIED BY THE COOPERATION WEHAVE RECEIVED FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN THE REGIONALEMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEX So FAR, 350 PROJECTSCOSTING MORE THAN $ 8.5 MILLION HAVE BEEN APPROVED4 AFURTHER 100 PROJECTS ARE UNDER CONSIDERATIONg APARTICULARLY ENCOURAGING FEATURE HAS BEEN THE WILLINGNESSOF PROJECT SPONSORS, PREDOMINANTLY LOCAL GOVERNMENTAUTHORITIES, TO CONTRIBUTE THEMSELVES TO THE COST OFPROJECTS. 171,
174THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ISTHE REAL IANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISMxK UNDER AVARIETY OF PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL GOVERNMENTWITH THE FUNDS TO UNDERTAKE A RANGE OF ACTIVITIESPREVIOUSLY INADEQUATELY CARRIED OUT OR TOTALLYNEGLECTEDyK WE DELIBERATELY HAVE MADE A ND SHALL MAKELOCAL GOVERNMENT A VEHICLE FOR OUR LEGISLATION ON AGEDPERSONS'I HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT,HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, MEALS ON WHEELS, HOME CARE ANDNURSING, NURSING HOMES AND HOMELESS MEN AND WOMENKTHESE ARE ALL ACTIVITIES WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELYREGULATED FROM THE NATIONAL OR STATE CAPITALS AND AREBEST PLANNED AND IMPLEMENTED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORKINGWITH LOCAL COMMUNITIES), THEY JUSTIFY ASSISTANCE FROMTHE NATION'IS FINANCES BUT NOT INCREASES IN RATESXLAST MONTH WE WERE FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO BEABLE TO ANNOUNCE THAT MR JUSTICE ELSE-MITCHELL, JUDGE OFTHE LAND AND THE VALUATION COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALESSINCE 1962, HAD ACCEPTED APPOINTMENTr AS CHAIRMAN OFTHE GRANTS COMMISSION FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARSx HE ISA MAN WITH A VERY DEEP UNDERSTANDING OF THE PROBLEMSOF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS WHEN HE WAS CHAIRMAN OF THE ROYALCOMMISSION INTO NEW SOUTH WALES' LAND VALUATION RATINGSYSTEMS IN 1965, HE SAID: am. 18/.
A18," PRESENT CENTRALI$ ED POLICIES, WHICH HAVE REDUCEDLOCAL GOVERNMENT TO A STATE OF VASSALAGE ANDCOUNCILS TO THE ROLE OF MENDICANTS, NEED DRASTICREAPPRAISEMENT, THOUGH I WONDER IF STATEGOVERNMENTS ARE VERY ANXIOUS FOR LOCAL AUTHORITIESTO GAIN ANY SUBSTANTIAL MEASURE OF FINANCIALINDEPENDENCE OR TO DEVELOP QUALITIES OF STRONG LOCALAUTONOMYx" THE POLICIES AND PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIANGOVERNMENT WILL, I BELIEVE, GO FAR TO END THATCONDITION OF VASSALAGE, THE PARADOX IS THAT MOREDIRECT COOPERATION BETWEEN THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ANDLOCAL GOVERNMENT CAN HELP END STATE CENTRALISM BY GIVINGTHE CHANCE FOR THE GROWTH OF GENUINE REGIONALISMK OURAIM IS TO PROMOTE THE QUALITY OF THE REGIONS AND TOPROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN THE REGIONSx IT CAN BEACHIEVED ONLY THROUGH COOPERATION BETWEEN THE NATIONALGOVERNMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTx THERE IS NO OTHERWAYx THIS IS NOT JUST MY CHOICE; IT IS A CHOICEIMPOSED UPON US BY NECESSITY, BY THE INEVITABILITY OFAUSTRALIAN HISTORY, ( END)



PRIMEL MINISTER'S PRESS STATEMENT TO DRiSPAi-PRES CONFEP E
NOVUIDER 1974
ISHOULD-EXPLAIN W~ HY I INTEND TO TAKE SUCH AN
ACTIVE ROLE IN THIS CAMJ'PAIGN, IDO SO BECAUSE I HAVE KNOWN
AND ADMIRED PERC TUCKER FOR HANY YEARS, KNOW-Hill! AS A
GREATr OULENSLANDER A1ND A GREAT ALISTRALIA1,1 WHO WILL MAIKE
AN EXCELLENT PREMIER AND STA14D UIP FOR THE INT'RESTS OF THIF,
STATE AS EFFECTIVELY AS DON DUNSTAN STAN~ DS FOR THE INTERESTS'
OF SOUTrH AUSTRALIA OR ERIC iE 2C!: FOR TPOSE OF TAS-MANIA,
IDO N07 EXPECT THAT1 WE WILL ALW. AYS ASREE ON THE APPLICATION
OF ALL POLICIES BUT IDO KNOW TH\ Tq CAM I-ALK' TO FACH
ClH'ER, THAT WE RESPECT LACH OTHER AND iHA~ r WE 111I1L SE ABLE
WORK rOGETHER 114 THlE jINTErfESTS OF 7' HI .), ATE.
IDO NOT COME HIRF. 10 DISCUSS FEDEFPAL
ISSUES&amp; THE ISSUES THAT I MIAL DIlSCUSS~ i 71HIS CAMFV--AIGN
ARE STATE I. SSUES4 DO NOT FLELIEVE 714AT U SL' 3WL
BC FOOLED BY THE PREMIERS TACTIC'OF IN'fR0[ DULCiNG COMPLFELY
IRREVELANT ISSUES JN'A S*[ ATE. ELECTION. 0UEEN-SLANDEr'l':' MUST
DECIDE WHE71HER* THEY WANT A STATE GOVFRNUM NT THAT CAN WO) RK,
EFFECTIVELY WqITH THE PRESENT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CO-OPERATE WVITH IT B~ UT NOT NECESSARILY ALWAYS AGREE WITH
IT. AT PRESpia You HAVE IN OUEE_: NSLAN~ D AS THE PREMIER
H~ AS ALREADY 114DICATED IN4 THIS CAMPAIGN--A GOVERNMENT WHICH
CONTINUES TO OBSTRUC7, WHICH REFUSES TO CO-OPEPATE, W[ HCH
ON SOME OCCASIONS EVEN REFUSES TO DISCUSS HAT1EI: S AIND OIN
OT14ERS FAILS TO FULFIL THE ELEMENTARY C01J R T ESY OF
REPLYIN4G 10 CORRESPONDENCE FROM * IHE Aus$ ThALIA?' OVERMEN 
It * b
f
S-2-THE PEOPLE OF OUEENSLAND. MUST DECIDE WHETHER THEY WANT
A CONTINUATrION OF* THIS POLICY OF NON-CO-OPERATION,
OBSTRUCTIOR4 AND INDEED VLICTO. IT IS A* POLICY WHIC; H
I BELI EVE AVREYAFFECTS THE' WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE STATE.. THI s IS' A. STATE ISSUE -NOT A FEDERAL
ISSUE -AND ICOME INTO THIS CAMPAIGN TO SHOW YOU HO1-FAR THE
WELFARE AND DEVELOP'ENT. OF THIS STATE HAVE BEEN IDI
BY THE STAND OF THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OF* QUEC-hLAND.
THINGS HAVE . COME -TO A SORRY STATE INDEED
WHEN THE PREMIER ' OF THIS GREAT STATE AND THE FRIt?.-MIIIST: p,
OF. THIS -COUNTRY CANNOT EVEN MELO. 1 TO DISCUSS MAiT; 7 R OF
IMPORTANCE BECAUSE TH RME EUES TO DO SO, TH C
PREMIER REFUSE D TO COME TO A PRIVATE* ROUNC-TAPL DlitNER
WITH MYSE2LF A D ALL THE0O HER F IYE PR EM I Ei ', S TO DI SCUS
* THE PROBLEMIS OF INiFLATION, AND IMiAT TE R S C1 ICE RNI G TH E
CONST. ITUT ION. TH E PREMIER SIMPLY IGNORED A LLETTER ( I. IC
IVWROTE TO HI1M VERY EARLY ' IN OUR ( JOVERNUHUUt Pi-OIi
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS ON THE GOENET$ PLCES
FOR GROWTH CENTRES AND STABLE LAND PRICES, Auio WHEI IfH
AUSTRAL IAN MINSITER FOR ABORIGINAL. AFFAIRS SOUGH' TO ClO." I
WITH STATE MINISTERS ABOUT THE ' RECOMMENDATIONS. OF A ROYAL.
ComI ss IoN ON ABORIGI NAL. LAND) Ri GHrS, THE 0U E ISL AN D1
MINISTER REFUSED TO EVEN DISCUSS THE MATTER, UNTIL A FEW DAYS'
* AGO, WHEN. I WROTE TO THE PREMIER OFFERING TO ACCEPT
RESP ONSIBILITY FOR THE STATE RAILWAYS AND REMOV0' E THE
FINANCIAL BURDENS THEY IMPOSE ON THE STATE, TEPREMIER
REPLIED NINE MONTHS LATER THAT HE WAS NOT EVEN PREPARED
TO. DISCUSS THE MATTER, AND YET DISCUSSIONS ARE PROCEEDING
ON' A NO COM14ITMENT BASIS WITH OTHER LIBERAL STATE GOVERNMENTS1 
b.
I -3-
TO BE QUITE FRANKI IT SURPRISES 1ME THAT THE
LBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY STATE GOVERNMENT. OF QUEENSLAND FINDS
IDEOLOGICALLY UNACCEPTABLE AND BERATES-IN THE-MOST
VIRULENT TERMS MATTERS WHICH OTHER L! BERAL-COUNTRY PARTY*
STATE GOVERNMENTS* FIND PERFECTLY. ACCLPTAPLE. ' IF THE
OVRMETOF THIS STATE WERE WILLING TO SIGN PRECI* SELY
ri1 W. Mm 44 IE,-CGNT DA/ PpCCi-IL_-7HL= -MC-r T~ A&amp; M A-S _ rH ATWHI1CH
V'VE S. IGNED WITH THE LIBERAL PREMIERS OF NE1' I SOUTH~
WALES AND VICTORIA, THEN THE GROWTHvC ETR N OfSLL EG
VOULD ' BE, A BLE TO PROCEED AS RAPIDLY AS THE GROWTH CENTRE
IS PROCEEDING IN ALBURY-WODONGA. IF THE GOVERNMENT OF
THIS STATE WERE-WILLING TO SIGN THE SAME AGREEIMENTS IN
PRECIS$ ELY -THE SAME TERMS AS' THE L I IERAL GOVERNMENTS IN
NEW. SOUTH WALESp V. ICTORIA AND WESTERi AUSTRALIA, ALL THC
OTHER LIBERAL'COUNTRY' PARTY GOVERNPIENTs IN THIS COUNTRY1
HAVE EXPRESSED A WILLINGNESS TO SIGN OR HAV'E ALREADY
SIGNED OiN LAND COUNCILS, THE14 W'E WOULD BE AB3LE TO ENSURE
THAT HOME PURCHASERS CAN AFFOR. D -THE. PRICE OF LAND,
THESE TWO EXAkMPLES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THIS STATE REFUSING
TO0 DO IWHAT OTHER* GOVERNMENTS OF THE SAME POLITICAL COLOUR
ARE WILLING TO DO HAVE ALREADY COST QUEENSLAND TENS OF
MILION OFDOLLARS IN FEDERAL GRANTS AND LOANS, M. O
HERE TO ARGUE THE MERITS OF OUR GROWTH CENTRE POLICY OR iD
OUR LAND COMMISSION ' POLICY. THAT IS A MATTER FOR A FE-DERAL."~
ELECTION.-I AM HERE TO SAY THAT QUEENSLANDERS SHOULD NOT
ACCEPT A STATE GOVERNMENT WHICH IS WILLING TO IMPEDE THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE STATE IN THIS WAY. THAT IS PROPERLY
A. MAT. TER FOR A STATE ELECTION. 
c r
T I DO NOT BELIEVE QUEENSLANDERS DESERVE A
GOVERNMENT WHICH, WHATEVER ITS DIFFERENCES OF OPINION
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, REFUSES TO EVEN ANSWER
LETTERS FROM THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA TO THE
PREMIER OF. QUEENSLAND. SUCH UNANSWERED LETTERS CONCERN
A PROPOSAL TO STUDY THE MEANS OF REDUCING ELECTRICITY Li,~ Ti't
S COSTS IN QUEENSLAND; A PROPOSAL TO ASSESS THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT. OF.. BEACH SAND MINING; A REQUEST FOR INFORMATION FAC
S ON THE IMPLICATIONS OF AMENDMENTS TO QUEENSLAND LEGISLATION
FOR ABORIGINES; A REQUEST TO THE GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND
FOR THEIR VIEWS ON MY GOERNMmENT'S PROPOSALS CONCERNING
ABORIGINES. WE OFFERED FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LAND
'. STABILISATION AND GROWTH CENTRES. I 1ROTE IN AUGUST 1973
CONCERNING OUR FI-NANCIAL PROPOSALS FOR THAT YEAR AND AGAINi
IN SEPTEMBER 1974 CONCERNING OUR PROPOSALS ARISING FROM
THE MOST RECENT BUDGET. I HAVE RECEIVED NO REPLY TO THE
FIRST AND THE MOST CURSORY REPLY TO T1E SECOND. AS EARLY
AS DECEMBER 1972, WHEN THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAD
BEEN IN OFFICE FOR LESS. THAN TWO WEEKS, I WROTE SEEKING THE
AGREEMENT OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT FOR THE AUSTRALIAN i
NATIONAL LINE TO OPERATE BETWEEN QUEENSLAND PORTS. IN
SHMAY 1973, THE PREMIER TOLD. ME THAT HE WAS CONSIDERING THE
MATTER. DESPITE SUBSEQUENT LETTERS IN APRIL AND JUNE 1974,
THERE IS NO REPLY.. WROTE SEEKING THE VIEWS OF THE L
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT ON THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN, I
I HAVE RECEIVED NO SUBSTANTIVE REPLY. I WROTE SEEKING THE
VIEWS OF THE GOVERNMENT ON THE PROPOSAL RELATING TO THE
MUTUAL REFERENCE OF POWERS, WHICH WAS BASICALLY AGREED
UPON AT THE MEETING WITH MYSELF AND THE FIVE PREMI-ERS
SWHICH THE QUEENSLAND PREMIER REFUSED TO ATTEND. ' I
7. 
* 4K. 7A.
I. T
TRICS-LETR WA SiE TIBUAPRL, O TAIS EANDI . AVEO
CONERETEC WAS HEL O INOELUWRTSIO ND SETPJOONCT
THESE REPORTS TO ALL STATE-PREMIERS FOR THEIR COViAENT
TWO MONTHS. AGO. ONLY THE PR EMI1ER OF OUEENSLAND HAS
FAILED TO REPLY Ilf ANY WAY WHATSOLVERI
THIS IS NOT'TH* E WAY THAT RELATIONS BETniEFI4N
AN AUSTRALIAN AND A STATE GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE CONDUCTED.
WHATEVER THEIR POLITICAL PERSUASI'ONS MAY BE.
.7. 



S111MCII NOTES FOll THlE PRIME MINISTER
TOOHMUL SHOPPING CENTRE
. GATiURDAY 16 NOVrENIl3Il 1974
FROT~ 1I1 IMGINNING 0O? TIlS CAMPAIGN MR-13JEUKEPETRSN
HS RID TO CON TILE Qw2E~ i"' LAND PEOPLE WITH
SLOGANS ANI) CATCI[ CRIVES. IN IS SLLF-AI'POINTED IZOLE AS
LEADElt 0F TiHE FEDERLAL OPP1OSITION, HE. HAS FORtGOTTEN WHAT A
STATE LLECTION IS ALL ABOUT.
h1IS A VICTIM~ OF HIS OWN OBSESSIONS, ILE IS
OI3SESSEPJ) WITH CANUERRA,~ l HE IS Ol) SE,-3SLD WITH CENTRALIS4l,
HIE IS OB3' ESSED WITH SOCIALIMS, HIE IS OB3SESSED WITH STATE
lZIGHTS. AND) HIS5 OB3SESSIONS . lIAVI! E 13LINDED HIM TO THEi!' NEEDS
OF OPUIINARY PEOPLE.
THERE HAS NEVEIR BEEN A P!?: lENIER SU REMMOTE, FROM THlE
GENUINE CONCEUNS OF THE A'EUPLE't SO OUT OF TOUCH ' WITH BH! EADAND-
BUTTEU IS61UES' 1 AND DAY-TO-DAY REALITIES. HIE WANTS TO
MAiUF, THISj ELECTION A FORUM FOIL SLOGANERIN U AIND PERSONAL
VILIFICATION. IT WON'IT WASH.
IT WON'T WASH 13EjCAUSE T11B I'L. O'LiE AREN'T INTERESTED
IN HI13 BUMY? 1EN AND PAPER TIGER6, IlSNAME-CALLING Alm
CAN-KICKING, TIHE SHADOWS AND) S1hI13OLET113 HE HAS l) ILAGGEi)
INTO TEIS CAMI'AIGNb 
VtI AUIE TIM~ PIIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO GIVE
MONEY OUTRIGHT GRANTS TO TILE STATES FOR URBAN TRANSPORT.
' RIEVIOUS COVMMl. I'ENTS ;' IZOVIDED LOANS FOR COUNTRY HIAILNAY
BINES BUT TILLY ALWAYS REQUIRED TaL STATES TO CONTRIBUTE
EQUAL AMOUNTS TIIMk; ELVESg AND TILE LOlNS HAD TO li R1EPAID
WiTIL INTEIUST. IN CO-OPERATION WITH MY GOVENI'INENT PEUCY TUCKER
CAN PROVIDE A NEW DEAL FOR BRISBANE TRANi'SPORT. UDER OUR
LEGISLATION WE AIE ALLADY tlAKING GIANTS FOI THREEX IMPORTANT
PROJECTS THE ELECTRZIFICATION OF TlI SUBUl'r11AN IL4ILWAY
FROM DAMIRA TO FEUNY GROVE, TlE ClIOSS RMIV-RAIL LINK, AND
AlliDITIONAL TACKS ON TILE NORTHERN CORRIDOR LINE PROM OMA
STRIET TO 1ORTIIGATE. TIllS MX,% XiXX IS 1' AIlTICULAIL' I'A VOURAI. ILE TO
PIJEENSLAND BE12' CAUSE AlRZISBANE WILL GET MiORE FOR PROJECTS
ALREADY A l'IROVED TIIAN ANY CAPITAL OTILER TIA1 SYDNEY.
BRAISBANE WILL GET CONSIDE&gt; AI3JLY iKOltE THAN NEll'LUOURNE AND
VERY MUCH MORE THAN THE;*' o OTHER TILE 6IMALLE. I CAlITALS. ALL
TOLD THLE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE PAYING IORB TILAN
$ 12 I1LLION FOR THESE THREE WORKS THAT IS, TWO-T&amp; IRDS OF
TILE ESTINATD1) TOTAL COST OF MOREd THAN 18 &amp; MILLION.
Mil BJELM -P'ETERSEN AND 1IS M INISTERS HAVE TRIED
TO CLAIM CREDIT FOR THESE 1!, ROJC'TS%;. THEY DID NEXT TO
NOTHING TIlENSELVES AND SCIL1% IIIID LABOM'S ELCTRIFICATION
PLANS BACK IN 1957. TH'Y IIEIJGED AND DITHERED ABOUT
SIGNING OUR U1rBAN TRAN. 3ioURT AGMI'U-FN1T AND THIll COLLEAGUES
IN CAINBEfLUA FORCED US TO l* OETPUONE" OU!? TRANSlORlT BILLS WHEN
THEY BLOCKED SUrPLY. NOW THEY HAVE TfHj E NERVE TO ACCUSE MY
GOVLINElfNT OF DELAY IN PROVIDING FUNDS,
I, I
ii C 
I HIAVE TOO MUCH RESPLCT FOR TflIj' GOOD SENSE AND
GOOD JUDGI! ThENT OF QU ENSLANDMIS TO BELIEVE THIEY WILL FALL
FOR THLE PJHWf" ILIZS' DISTRACTIONS, IT'S TINM Mll 1JELKE-PE. TERSEN
FACED UP TO THE REFAL CONCERINS. OF TILE PEOVLE THEIR EDVJCATIONO
THEIR Jil! ALTHI, THEIR TR. ANSP'ORT, THIuR CITIES. TIIEIR-H1OUSING,
THE PRICE OF LAIND, TILE DEVELOPIMNT OF THEIR STATE6
THESE AUE THE ISSUES ON WH11ICII œ' EC TUCKE R IS
FIGHTING THIS ELECTION. AND IE HAS MY WHOLEHEARTED SUPPORT.
THlE BJELMKE-I'ETER~ iSE'N GOVERMNMENT HAS HELD BACK
THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND BECAUSE Ui? A PETiTY Dl%. SLIIMOIF
CANBERRA. OH-ISSUE AFTER ISSUE, Mt W3ELKE-PETE11SEN
RAS REFUSED) TO. CO.-OPLIRATE bITII US IN PLANS FOR QUEENSLAND IS
DEVELOPMENT. HE HAIS ' SPURED OUR OFFER OF MhASSIVE ASSI37A. INCE TO
MAKCE TOAINSVILLE A GRO%. WTil CENTREV A VIGOROUS3 AND E) U1ANDING
MODERN ClTY. HE HAS REJECTED QUA EFI'ORTS TU SET UP' LAND
COMMISSIONS WHICH WILL SUING DOWN TIHE PRICE OF LAND FOR
HOM" E B3UYERS. LII3EUAL GOVEiLNIIENTS IN UT1IEI : iATiES ARL TAKING
THE-. SL' FUNDS, ' i( ING WITH US AND GETTING UN WITH TIME JOB.
MRlJJLEi'TPSN O11-' 3TIEACY HAS CO0JT Q UEE,: NSLAVD
AT S5O IILLION IN AUSTILALIAN1 CGUViN: li, % l-T AS,-SISTfANCE,
DUIA. ING T1117, ' AST YEAf. WITH EVERY MONTH THLAT VASSES TILE
COST TO TI-12 QUHEN.' iLAXD IPEOrLE 1NCREA6i; S AND THEIR STATE
FALLS FURlTHElR 13U11N1) THE REST OF AU&amp; STILALIA. oe,/, 
TILE QU. LE. N' SLANI) GOVERNPRtNT HAS RE'USED EVE,. N TO
DISCUSS OUR OFFER TU ASSUME HESPONSIBILITY FOR STATE
RAILWAYS AND 111, LIEV15 THlE STATE ( GOVER6NNL1, NT OF TIM; S CMI'TLING
BURDEN ON T1L2Ifl BUDGET3. WE HAVE: OFFEMILD QUEENSLAND A
2-FOR-1 SUBSIDY FO; L AI'' UVED URBAN PUBLIC TRANSIORT PROJE'CTS.
VE HIAVE~ HAD) LITTLE CU-O1' LATION IN THIIS IlNWIMMINT AIvLEAo
Y2.' T NO S; TAiZ~ GOVIiIZNIMZNT HAS A 61LODDIML RECORD
IN URBAN P'UBLIC TIL NS11ORT TH[ AN Ms. I3JELI( E -P'ETERSEN
GOVERNIMENT. TIIERRE IS J3UVE TALK AT TRlE MOMENT AB0U7 NEW CITY
RAIL LINKS 1ND i'A66ENGEiZ TitANS. I GIVE AN AJSURAA' 4C0 THAT
PIX GuVERNMENT WILL 3L E iAL) TO CONSIDER ANY 1JORTHIMhILE
VIZOJE. CT MXkITING AUSTRALIAN GOVERNUENT A.' SI' 31ANCE.
BlUT WHAT 15 THE COUNTRY PARTY-LI) 3ERAL RECORD ON
P~ UBLIC TRANS'Oi2T IN 1957,9 411: 1 THLY CAME TO OFFICE, THEY SCR APPED
THE PRiEVIOUS LA13OR GOVL1RNjM1EIdT' PLANS TO ELECTRIFY THlE
BRISBANE SUBURaAN RAI LWAY SYSTEM.
IN UCT013" ER 1971p bl[~ t ANNOUNCEI) THAT TIMl S; TATEGUVERNM'ENT
AUTIIORISf. D A S TAR*% T OIN TM' CONSTRUCTION OF
THlE MEIVALE 2J; R. 1ILWAY SYSTEM COINNECTING THlE NORTHHIIRN
~ AN~ 1vTUtR 14uu:~: IT11 A NL11 RIVER BRIDGE. TENDEIR 1AV'E
TILL NUT . L~ LT FOR TIS WOURK. 
IN MYA 1972, ; 3EIFORE TH[ E LAST STATE ELECTIONp
SIR GU RDON CHALK SiAID) THI' GOVL-' 1.1[, NT WOULD CO-OUDINATE
AND RATIONALI~ iE ALL FORMS1 OF PUBLIC TRANS3PORT IN i14ISBANhS
UNDER ONE ULGIONAL TIi X" I'OUT AUTHORZITY. THERE WEIME .11wlIS1* S
OF NEW RAILWAY STATIONS AND BUS/ JZAIL INTL1hCAGEJ. THE
SUBU111AN, IL SYSTEMi WAS TO BE ELETRIIIk UND.[ Ii A
P'LAN. THE INLTROPOLI TAN TP.. ANS IT POLICY 0011111TTE
RESI'ONS I3Bl: FOR T1" 11lS C 0= u) NATION ItAS NOT SET. UP' UNTIL
AUGUST 1973. -ALMOST ANOTHIING 1AS B. u" ZN DOINE. A CRAIRMAN
OF THlE METROP. OLITAN TUNANSiIT PROJECT BOARD HAS BEEN
Al'OINTLD BUT WON'T TAIUE, OFFICE UN~ TIL KSXT YEAH.
IT. IS BAD IN1OUGII WHEN A STATE Pi1P'IE 1EUSED
TO CO-OPERAITO WbITil THE NATIONAL OVEUNMENT IN MUE INTMRES-TS
OF HIS STATE, IT IS WORS13 V11314lIE CONTINUES DOING NOTHING
ON IS OWN, THEIi.~ Al TRZUT1 IS THAT 11IRISBANB HAS Of THE
VJORST PUBLIC Tl" NSPORT IN AUSTRALIA. ALL THE. PIMMIL" T?. CAN
OFF,' EU IS IIIGIIER IRA IL FAtE. 51.4 AND IIGIITS9 AS VERC TUCIM-a
SAID IN HIS5 POLICY SI'Et{ C11: " TilE 2UEENSLAND ( iOVE1R'VN'NT
PIZOVIDES JIMTTER WAGOLNS FORl COAL ' T' 1A14 CAM6IAGES FOR PEOUI1 LL'.
IT WAS' IN 13IJ61ANE DJi; I Nc TMU 1972 CAM: P1' AIZiN THAT
I IIEVEALLI) FOR T1. l1 FIRST1 TIi-ji UUR ' PROP1OSALS TO UI'GRADflE
PUBLIC -TRANS1POT IN QUIZ 1' 1AJOIL CITIES, 
WE. ARtE TILE FIRST AUSTRALIAN GOVERIMENT TO GIVE
blONLY OUTUIGHT GRANTS TO TIllE STATES FOR URIBAN TDAVrOllT.
PREVIOUS GOV4,' IUMBMNTS ROVII) DED LOANS FOR COUNTRY RAILW~ AY LINES
BUT TUEY ALWAYS REQUIRED THE STATES TO CONTILIBUTE EQUAL AMOUNTS
THIEMI3ELVES, AND THE LOANS HA) TO BE REJ:', PAID WITH INTERPt. ST.
IN CO-l,. 4JPETION WITu MY GOY M4ENTI, I'ERC TUCKER-1 CAN
PROVIDE A NEIWr DEAL FUR ISiU3BANE TIZANS'OaT. UN) I OU4 LEGISLATION
WE A11; ALREA]) Y IAKING GRANTS POlL THIRZE IMPORTANT 1' ROJECTS
THE ELECTRIFICATION OF TIlM SUBURBJAN RZAILLtAY FROM DARRA TO
FERNY UIWVII, TIEl CROSS RIVER RAIL LINK, AND) IDUf lITIONAJL TRACKS
ON TIE NORTHERN CORRIDOR LINEN FROM RObNA STREET TO IOIZTIIGATE.
FIVE FUR4Tll) ER, 1' UOJECTS llAVE-BEEN A'i" RUOVED SINCE T1E1l ZSTlART OF
TIl11 FINACIAL YLA11, INCLUDING ELCTRIFICATION MOMI IiSII'ICI
TO DARlZA. TIllS AlU* 4WfAGE1UtPNT IS PARTICULARLY FAVOURABLE, TO
QUEENSLANJD BI3CAUSE BRISBANE WILL GET MO,= FOR PRIOJE-CTS AL',; rEADY
Ai'l'RUOVJ. D THAN ANY CAPITAL OTHER THAN SYDNIMY. BZISBANE I ILL
GET CONSIDERABLY MORE TMAN MLL, 30UPNE AND VEY ' IUcM 1MorJ:: TIIAN
THE OTHER THREE SMALLER CAPITALS. ALL TOLD TIE AUSTRLIAN
GOVLRNUCMT WILL BE PAYIN4G U1MR THAN lol2 MILLION FOR TIIE
THREE MAJOR WORKS TUAT IS, TWO-TIIUDS OF T120 ESTIIIATELD
TOTAL COST OFNIhOUE TIUN $ 18 MILLION AI) ANONIUTLL 17.29 MILLION
FOR TH SMIALLEU 1' RUJLCTS. A TOTAL UP PEA. IY'S420 -MILLIONO
0# P
III 
THEIR APPROACH TO UR3AN TRANSPORT TYPIFIES THE
HYPOCRISY AND NEGATIVISM OF THEIR WHOLE PROGRAM. LABOR
HAS ACTED; OUR OPPONENTS HAVE STALLED AND COMPLAINED. ONLY
TlIRZOUG11 CO-OPERATION BETWEEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT IN QUEENSLAND
AND MY GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA WILL BRISBANE PEOPLE GET THE
DECENT TRANSPORT SERVICES THEY DESERVE. t * t
.4 I
8 q, 



i i, I i h 7/
I ' U A
Jri
a: a I U
SPEECH NOTES FOR THIE PIM MINISTER;, TIE HON. E. G. WIHITLAM, Q. C. M
FOR TIE GREEK COMMUNITY CENTRE, SOUTH IRISBANE
SUNDAY 17 NOVEMBER 1974
1. I SPEAK TO YOU TODAY AS YOUR1 COUNTRYMEN IN GREECE
VOTE IN A DEMOCRATIC ELECTION FOR TIll,,' FIRST ' TIHflE SINCE 1967.
I REJOICE THALT DEIMOCRACY HAS BEE-', N HESTOZD IN THE COUNTRY OF
ITS BIRTH. THE ELECTE GOVERNMPNT OF GMEECE WILL HAVE TIHE
FIRM SUPPORT AND FRIENDSHIP OF AUSTRALIA, ITS GOVERNMENT AND
ITS PEOPLE.
2. I KNO1, THAT INMANY GRES IN AUSTRALIA FEARED FOR
THE POLITICAL STABILITY OF THEIR 11OI-I'AND DURING TILE RULE OF
TIHE COLON[ ELS AND EVEN AFTEIZ, T1IE MILITARY R. EGIME WAS OVERTIIIROWN.
MANY G1' EEKS WH10 FOUND THISlELVES IN AUSTRALIA AS TLii; OR ARY
VISITORS DURING Tl RECENT TU1i6ULENCE IN GREECE HAVE BEE'N
RELUCTANT TO RETURN H1OME UNITIL TIE SITUATION IS CLAIFI1IIIED.
TILE AUSTRALIAN GOVERUNMENT HAS NOT ENVORCUGD THEIR DEPARTURE
AND WILL NOT DO SO. T1hOS; E fllU DO NOT WANT TO RETURN HIOME
INNEI.; DIATELY HAVE HAD TIIEIZi VISAO; EXTZNtJ) E) AND TIllS PRACTICE
WILL CONTINUE FOR TIlE TINE BEINGi TIll MINISTER FOR LABOR AND
IMMIGRATION, MR1C1L YDE CAMEIZON, HAS GIVEN T1llS ASSURANCE TO THE
GREEK COMMIUNITY, AND I AN HAPPY TO ILWEPLAT IT TODAY. / 2 
-2-
3. iANY GREEKS' IN AUSTiRALIA HAVE BEEN DISTURBED BY
THE RECENT EVENTS. IN CYPRUS. AUSTRALIA HAS CONTRIBUTED A
POLICE CONTINGENT TO THE U. N. PEIACE KIEPING FORCE IN CYPIHUS
SINCE ITS INCEPTION ' IN 1964. QUEENSLAND, LIKE EVERY OTHIER11
STATE AND TERRITORY; CONTRIBUTED TO TIAT. FORCE. ONE OF TIlE
FIRST DECISIONS OF MY GOVERNMENT WAS TO IKEE1' TIlE FORCE IN
BEING, THOUGH THE LIBIERAL GOVERlNMENT HAD DECIDED TO PHASE
IT OUT. DURING 1973. IN JANUARY 1973 I WROTE TO T II PRELIERS
OF QUEENSLAND, N. S. W. AND VICTORIA'ASKING THEM TO MAINTAIN
THEIR POLICE CONTINGENTS IN THIE FORCE. SIR ROBERT ASKIN AND
MR HIIAMER AGREED TO DO SO.. -Rn B1ELKEI-PETERSEN WAS TILE ONLY
PRtEiIER TO REFUSE. TIHE FORCE NUiBERED 35 IN JUNE 1974.
LAST VEEK AN AUSTRALIAN SERGEANT WASO KILLED AND ANOTHER
INJURED BY A MINE EXPLOSION DURING SERVICE IN CYPRUS.
' 1 NOTES ON GREEKS IN AUSTRALIA
SOME OF TIlE FIRST GREE'i SETTLERS IN AUSTRALIA W'EI. E
SAILORS WHIIO LEFT THEIR SHIPS DURING TIIE FIRST GOLD RUSH IN
TIlE 1850' S. A NUMBER OF IONIAN GREEKS WHO0 MET AUSTRALIAN
TROOPS DURING THE BOERi WAR EVENTUALLY S:' TTLED IN AUSTRALIA.
MANY LINKS BETVEEN AUSTRALIANS AND GREEKS ESTABLISHED DURING
THE EVACUATION OF GREECE IN-ORLD WAR II ARE STILL REMEMBERED
IN BOTH COUNTRIES. AT TlHE END OF 1973 THERlE V\ ERlE, ABOUT 153,000 GREEKBORN
PEIRSONS IN AUSTRALIA. ABOUT 88; 000 HAD BECOME AUSTRALIAN
CITIZENS SINCE 1945.. / 3 
4
i
-3-
, SIR GEORGE BOVIEN, THE FIRST GOVERNOR OF QUEENSLAND
( 1856-68), SPENT MANY YEARS OF HIS LIFE IN THE IONIAN ISLANDS.
HIS WIFE, DIAMANTINA ROMA, WAS LBORN ON ITHACA. SHE WAS
PARTICULARLY ACTIVE : IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF QUEENSLAND AND IS
REMEMBERED IN THE NAMES OF THE TOWN OF ROMA, THE DIAMANTINA
RIVER AND ITHACA SHIRE.
GEORGE GEORGES, BORN IN DARWIN OF GREEK PARENTS, LS
BEEN AN AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND SINCE
1968. NICHOLAS LAURENITUS 1O110 BECAME A MILLIONAIRE TIIOUGH
REAL ESTATE IIAS LMADE CONSIDERABLE DONATIONS TO CHAIITABLE
OIRGANISATIONS AND GAVE'A LARGE SUNI TO TIIE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
TO ESTABLISH A CHAIR OF . IODERN GII; EK.
MICHAEL KAILIS HAS ESTABLISHIED A CONSIDERIABLE
FORTUNE TIIROUGII IIIS SHIP BUILDING, FISHING AND SEAFOOD
PROCESSING INDUSTRIES IN lrESTER'N AUSTRALIA AND THE NORTHERN
TERRITORY, TIHE GREEK ORT01ODOX CHlURCH IIAS P1OIIED TIE BACKBONE
OF ORGANISED GREEK LIFE IN AUSTRALIA SINCE 1908 AND HAS
. PIROVIDED TIHE FOCUS FOR SOCIAL COHESION.
( FOR BACKGROUND ON MIGIRANTS GEN1ERALLY SEE ATTACHED NOTES ON
ITALIANS.) 



SPEECH BY TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE IION. E. G. WIITLAM, Q. C. M. P.,
AT THE NEW IMELBOURNE HOTEL, SOUTH BRISUANE,
SUNDAY 17 NOVEMBER 1974
WHEN I UNDERTOOK THIS CAMPAIGN IN SUPPORT OF
PERC TUCKER AND HIS COLLEAGUES I MADE IT CLEAR THAT I WOULD
BE FIGHTING THE ELECTION PRIMARILY ON STATE ISSUES. I CAME
TO ENDORSE PERC TUCKER'S VIGOROUS AND COMPREHENSIVE POLICIES
FOR SOLVING THE PROBLEMS OF QUEENSLAND AND PROMOTING ITS
DEVELOPMENT. I WANT TO SEE THIS RICH, IIVERSE, EXCITING
STATE MOVE FORWARD CONFIDENTLY* WITI THE REST OF AUSTRALIA.
I WANT TO SEE ITS RESOURCES DEVELOPED SPEEDILY AND
EFFICIENTLY, ITS PRODUCTS SOLD AIBOAD AT THE BEST POSSIBLE
PRICES, ITS ENORMOUS A( RICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL
DEVELu " D FI , j THE IENEFIT OF ALL ITS CITIZENS, ITS CITIES
I'LANNED TO THE BEST ADVANTAGE, ITS TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
INPROVED, AND ITS PEOPLE PROVIDED WITH TIE BEST EDUCATION,
THE I3EST HEALTH SERVICES, TIHE BEST HOUSING AND THE HIGIIEST
S'TANDARD OF LIVING TIIAT A MODERN INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY CAN
AVi,, iD. IN MY CONCERN AND AFFECTION FOR QUEIENSLAND, IN NY
KNOWLji, OF YOUR STATE AND MY LONG-STANDING ASSOCIATION
WITH IT, I Y'IELD TO NO ONE NOT EVEN MR BJELKE-PETERSEN
OR SIR GORDON CHALK.
I CAME HERE WITI NO GRUDGE AGAINST YOUR PREMIEIR,
AND FOR ALL OUR DISAGREEMENTS, I BEAR NO LASTING ANIMOSITY
TOWARDS HIS GOVERNMENT. I HAVE DONE NY BEST TO WORK VITH
IIIl FOR THEI GOOD OF THIS STATE. IF I POINT TO FAILINGS IN
HIS GOVERNMENT'S PERFORMANCE I KNOW YOU WILL UNDERSTAND I
HAVE NO DESIRE TO BUCKET QUEENSLAND OR ITS CITIZENS. 
L i o
l J" i
-2-
IF IT ERE POSSIBLE TO CONDUCT THIS CAMPAIGN WITHOUT
RECRIMINATION OR BITTERNESS I WOULD GLADLY DO SO. I AM
IAPPY FOR THE FACTS TO SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES. TODAY I SHALL
CONFINE MYSELF TO SOME SIMPLE FACTS. THEY ARE MORE
ELOQUENT THAN ALL TIE SLOGANS AND CATCIICRIES WE HAVE
IEARD FROM THE PREMIER AND HIS SUPPORTERS.
I ASK THE PEOPLE OF QUEENSLAND TO CONSIDER THE
TRUTH ABOUT THEIR STATE, TO LOOK AT THE FACTS CALMLY AND
THIOUGHTFULLY, TO FACE UP TO THEIR IMPLICATIONS.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT INFLATION AND RISING PRICES.
THE FACT IS THAT IN QUEENSLAND PRICES ARE RISING FASTER
TIAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. THAT IS NO ACCIDENT.
IT CAN BE TRACED TO TIE POLICIES AND ATTITUDES OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT, AND I SHALL RETURN TO THAT IN A MOMENT.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT UNEMPLOYMENT. AGAIN, THE
FACT IS THAT IN QUEENSLAND UNEMPLOYMENT HAS RISEN FASTER
OVER TIE PAST YEAR THAN ANYWIIEIE ELSE BY "' AR IN AUSTRALIA.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN OFFERS NO SOLUTIONS; HE CERTAINLY OFFERS
NO COMFORT TO THE UNEMPLOYED. HIS SOLE REACTION IS TO
IDEPRIVE TIEM OF STATE UNEMIPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND SEEK
SCAPEGOATS IN CANBERRA.
AS THE LEADER OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT I ACCEPT
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT OF THIS COUNTRY. 
I DON'T SHUFFLE OFF THAT RESPONSIBILITY ON TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN.'
AT THE SANE TIME MR BJELKE-PETERSEN CANNOT SHUFFLE OFF HIS
OWN RESPONSIBILITIES ON TO NE. HE KNOWS, AS WE ALL KNOW, THAT
UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION ARE NOW AT CRITICAL LEVELS THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD AND THAT FOR THE FIRST TIME EVERYWHERE, TO AN
UNPRECEDENTED DEGREE, THESE TWO PROBLEMS ARE OCCURRING
SIMULTANEOUSLY.' MY OWN GOVERNMENT HAS USED EVERY WEAPON AT
ITS DISPOSAL, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL POWER IT POSSESSES, IN THE
BATTLE AGAINST INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT. WE WILL NOT LET UP
IN THAT BATTLE. TIIE FURTHER ECONOMIC MEASURES I ANNOUNCED TIIS
WEcEK IN PARLIAMENT WILL BOOST BUSINESS CONFIDENCE, SAFEGUARD
JOBS AND LAY THE FOUNDATION FOR CO-OPERATION AND RESTRAINT IN
DEALING WITH INFLATIONARY PRESISURES. WHAT HAS MR BJELKE-PETERSEN
DONE? HE HAS DONE NOTHING. HE CAMPAIGNED AGAINST OUR REFERENDUM
TO SEEK GREATER POWERS IN THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION. HE
REFUSES TO USE. THE POWERS HE ALREADY FOSSESSES.
LOOK AT TIE CONTRAST WITH OTHER STATES. IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WHERE THERE IS A LABOR GOVERNMENT, THE STATE
HAS USED ITS POWERS EFFECTIVELY TO CHECK THE LAND PRICE SPIRAL.
THIS IS SOMETHING EVERY STATE CAN DO. IF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT CO-OPERATED WITH US IN SETTING Ui A LAND COMMISSION,
AS THE THREE LIBERAL STATES ARE DOING, WE COULD REDUCE THE
PRICE OF LAND FOR THE HOME BUYER. IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
ALLOWED THE AUSTRALIAN -NATIONAL LINE TO OPERATE BETWEEN QUEENSLAND
PORTS IT COULD CUT SHIPPING FREIGHTS. / 4 
-4-
IF HE CO-OPERATED WITH OUR PLAN TO REDUCE ELECTRICITY COSTS
IN QUEENSLAND WE COULD CHECK PRICE RISES OVER A VAST
RANGE OF GOODS. HE REFUSES TO WORK EFFECTIVELY WITH
OFFICIALS FROM OTHER STATES IN FORMULATING ANTI-INFLATIONARY
POLICIES. THERE IS A LIMIT TO WHAT ANY GOVERNMENT CAN
DO TO CHECK PRICES IN A WORLD-WIDE INFLATIONARY SITUATION,
BUT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN I REPEAT DOES NOTHING.
LET ME DEAL WITH SOME PARTICULAR ISSUES.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT TRANSPORT. THE SAD FACT
IS THAT BRISBANE HAS THE WORST, THE MOST DELAPIDATED
URBAN TRANSPORT SYSTEM IN AUSTRALIA. MY GOVERNMENT WANTS
TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT. WE HAVE OFFERED ALMOST
MILLION OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS TO ELECTRIFY YOUR
SUL I'BAN-RAILWAYS AND UPGRADE BRISBANE TRANSPORT SERVICES
GENERALLY. NO NATIONAL GOVERNMENT HAS EVER MADE FREE
GRANTS FOR URBAN TRANSPORT BEFORE. PERC TUCKER'S GOVERNMENT
WILL WORK VITH US IN IMPLEMENTING THESE PLANS.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN'S GOVERNMENT WAITED A LONG TIME BEFORE
ACCEPTING OUR PROPOSALS. AS FAR BACK AS 1957 HIS PARTY
SC.:'. PED. THE PREVIOUS LABOR GOVERNMENT'S PLANS FOR
ELECTRIFICkTION. THEY HAVE DONE NOTHING SINCE. IT IS AS
SIMPLE AS THAT. MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT TIE DIFFICULTIES
OF HOUSING. THE FACT IS AGAIN THAT QUEENSLAND'S RECORD
IN WELFARE HOUSING IS TIE WORST IN AUSTRALIA. THEY HAVE
DONE LESS THAN ANYONE FOR TIE PEOPLE MOST IN NEED OF HOUSING,
AND EVEN LESS THAN LABOR DID IN QUEENSLAND IN ITS LAST YEAR
IN OFFICE IN 1956-57. IN THAT YEAR LABOR BIJILT 1900 HOUSING
CONMISSION HOMES. 
LAST YEAR TILE I3JELKCE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT BUILT 1460, YET
HAD ALMOST' $ 12 MILLION UNSPENT IN IIOUSING. FUNDS FROM
CANI3LRRAv DESPITE A 40 PER CENT INCREASE IN POPULATION
SINCE LABOR WAS IN POWER.
bllt BJELK] E-PETERSEN TALKS ABOUT THE MEANNESS AND
WICKNEDNESS OF CANBERRA* TIM, FACT IS THAT QUEENSLAND
HLAS RECEIVED MORE 1IlA'l) CASH FROM THE PRESENT NATIONAL LABOR
GOVERMENT THAN IT HAS RECEIVED FROMI ANY PREVIOUS * GOVERNMENT
IN HISTORY. NO AMOUNT OF HEDGING OR QUALIFICATION, NO
TALK OF RESTRICTIONS OR STRINGS OR TILE VALUE OF MONEY,
CAN ALTER TILE FACT THAT WE IIAVI BE-EN OVERWHELMINGLY
GENEROUS. IN THLE LAST FINANCIAL YEAH OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS
TO QUEENSLAND TOTALLED $ 739 MILLION. NOT ONLY DOES
QUEENSLAND GET MUCH, MUCH MORE THAN z1IE DID FROM THlE
LIW11-UALS IN CANBERRA; SHE GETS CONSID) ERABLY PMORE PER HEAD
OF 1PO14' JL % TION THAN OTHER STATES ( JET NOW. QUEENSLAND
RECEIVED MORE THAN 3382 PER HEAD) OF POPULATION IN 1973-74
COMPARIED WITII .1343 P'ER HEAD) IN AVEL.* AGE PAYNENTS TO ALL
STATES. LAST YE,' AR OUR GRANTS FOR'PilIMARY AND SECONDARY
EDUC. ATION WERE UP 145 PER CENT ON THlE YEAR BEFORE, TER'ITIARY
EDUCATION WAS UP 165 PER CENT, TECHNICAL EDUCATION 110 PER
CENT, lve, 77ARE HOUSING 20 PER CENT, A13011IGINAL A]) VANCEIIENT
NEAHLY 30 PER'I CENT. HEIALTHI AND WELFARE, ROADS AND URBAN
AND HEGIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN QUEENSLAND ARE. ALL GETTING
RECORD) AMOUNTS FROM MY GOVERNMENT. e* 1 6 
SO MUCH FOR THE HARSH TREATMENT OF QUEENSLAND BY
THE SOCIALISTS IN CANBERRA. W-HAT OF OUR ATTITUDE TO QUEENSLAND'S
. DEVELOPMENT? YOU HAVE SEEN HOV MR BJELKE-PETERSEN ' REFUSES TO
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN MAKING TOWNSVILLE A REGIONAL GROWTH
CENTRE.-ONE OF THE GREAT FUTURE CITIES OF AUSTRALIA, COMPARABLE
IN SIZE AND IMPORTANCE WITH THE BEST PLANNED CITIES IN THE WORLD.
I HAVE GIVEN MANY INSTANCES IN THIS CAMPAIGN OF HIS FAILURE TO
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN INITIATIVES FOR THE PROGRESS AND ADVANCEMENT
OF YOUR STATE. IN THE PAST TWO YEARS QUEENSLAND HAS MISSED OUT
ON AT LEAST $ 50 MILLION IN FUNDS FROM MY GOVERNMENT BECAUSE OF
THE ATTITUDE OF THE PREMIER. THAT IS THE COST OF MR BJELKEPETEROEN'S
OBSTINACY. THE FACT IS AGAIN UNPALATADLE THAT.
NO STATE IS MORE IN NEED OF BALANCED DEVELOPMENT THAN QUEENSLAND.,
THE DRIFT FROM COUNTRY TOWNS TO* THE CITIES IN THIS STATE HAS
REACHED A RATE UNPARALLELED IN QUEENSLAND'S HISTORY.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN REGARDS THIS TREND AS LESS IMPORTANT THAN
HIS DISLIKE OF THE ELECTED NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
FINALLY, MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TALKS OF THE THREAT TO
DEMOCRACY IN THIS STATE FROM MY GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA. IN
' ONE REMARKABLE PHIIRA3E HE TRIED TO PERSUADE YOU THAT THIS ELECTION
WILL DETERMINE WHETHER QUEENSLAND " CONTINu S TO EXIST". WHAT
IS THE REAL THREAT TO DEMOCRACY IN QUEENSLAND? THE RIGGING
OF ELECTORAL, BOUNDARIES IN THIS STATE IS NOT A THREAT BUT A
FACT OF LIFE. YOU KNOW THE STORY. IT IS A SHAMEFUL ONE.
LAIO0R WON MORE VOTES IN THE 1972 ELECTIONS THAN THE LIBERALS
AND THE COUNTRY PARTY BUT WON FEWER SEATS THAN EITHER OF THEM.
A PREMIER WHO HOLDS OFFICE WITH 19 PER CENT OF THE VOTE IS
HAIRDLY QUALIFIED TO LECTURE ABOUT THREATS TO DEMOCRACY. / 7. 
MY GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MUCH FOR QUEENSLAND AND HAS
OFFERED TO DO MUCH MORE. WITHOUT CO-OPERATION FROM YOUR
GOVERNMENT WE CANNOT ACHIEVE OUR GOALS FOR THE PEOPLE OF
THIS STATE. I HAVE SHOWN YOU THAT THE PROBLEMS YOU FACE ARE
IN MANY CASES WORSE THAN THEY ARE IN THE REST OF AUSTRALIA,
AND THAT YOUR DIFFICULTIES ARE INCREASED BY TIHE NEGLECT, THE
COMPLACENCY, THE PIG-HEADEDNESS OF YOUR STATE GOVERNMENT.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT WHOSE ATTITUDES ARE REJECTED BY
EVERY OTHER STATE GOVERNMENT IN AUSTRALIA INCLUDING THE
LIBERAL STATES OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT CLINGS TO OFFICE BY A
FLAGRANTLY UNDEMOCRATIC VOTING SYSTEM.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT WANTONLY FORFEITS $ 50 MILLION
FOR DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT WHOSE RECORD IN MANY FIELDS IS
THE WORST IN AUSTRALIA.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT TOLERATES THE STEEPEST RATE
OF PRICE INCREASES AND THE STEEPEST RISE IN UNEPLOYMENT OF
ANY ST-TE. IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT REFUSES TO DISCUSS, TO TALK,
TO NEGOTIATE, TO CO-OPERATE. 
I TAKE NO PLEASURIE FROM THIS SORRY RECORD. I SUSPECT
THAT IT ALARMS AND DISILLUSIONS MANY OTHER AUSTRALIANS AND
MANY FRIENDS OF OUR COUNTRY ABROAD. I HOPE QUEENSLANDERS WILL
FACE THESE FACTS. ON 7 DECEMBER THEY HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
VOTE FOR A CHANGE OF DIRECTION AND A CHANGE OF HEART. IT WILL
BE A CLEAR CHOICE A CHOICE BETWEEN CO-OPERATION OR CONTINUING
CONFRONTATION, A CHOICE BETWEEN PROGRESS OR CONTINUING
BACKWARDNESS, A CHOICE BETWEEN RATIONALITY OR DOGMATISM, A
CHOICE BETWEEN GOODWILL AND GOOD SENSE OR A CONTINUATION OF
ONE MAN'S HATREDS AND OBSESSIONS, A CHOICE BETWEEN MATURITY AND
ENLIGITENMENT OR THE FORCES OF EXTREMISM AND MALEVOLENCE. FOR
THOSE WITH QUEENSLAND'S BEST INTERESTS AT HEART, FOR THOSE WHO
RESPECT THE ENERGY AND IDEALISM OF HER PEOPLE, IT SHOULD NOT
BE A DIFFICULT CHOICE TO MAKE. I 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR A SPEECH AT ST PAUL'S HALL, IPSWICH, 18 NOVEMBERk 1974
1. I am proud to share this platform tonight with
Rex Connor, the Minister for Minerals and Energy. The people
of this city and this State have no greater friend and
benefactor. Labor's policies for the development of our coal,
minerals and other resources are in the best of hands.
Rex Connor's handling of our mineral resources has safeguarded
Australian ownership and vastly increased the returns to
Australian producers from the sale of our exports. His
achievements will ensure. They will be gratefully acknowledged
by millions of Australians today and in generations to come.
2. Queenslanders in particular should examine the
fruits of Labor's policies on-. minerals and energy. The future
of Queenslands coal industry has never looked brighter. Exports
are at a record level, both in volume -and price. The Labor
Government by careful planning and diligent negotiation has
secured fair returns on our mineral exports for the benefit of*
all Australians. We have carefully supervised contract tender
prices. Between January last year and September this year
increases negotiated in the export prices of Queensland coal
total $ 1836 million over the full terms of all coal export
contracts. The value of the increases actually received during
this period is approximately $ 100 million.
3. The facts can no longer be suppressed by the Queensland
Government they are crucial to Queensland's future development
and prosperity. The export controls imposed on black coal
exports from Queensland and New South Wales to Japan, Europe
and elsewhe~ re have been outstandingly successful. Coal exporting
companies are no longer fighting each other and cutting prices.
Above all we have put an end to interstate competition which was
resulting in lower returns to Australia as a whole. It is one
thing for Australia to compete with other countries for markets.
It is absurd for one Australian state to compete with another.
4. Japanese coal buyers. now acce, the value of dealing
with the. Australian coal industry under tne new export controls
system. -They know there is a certainty of supply at a fair
price and that the guarantee of the Australian Government stands
behind Queensland coal producers. As a result of Rex Connor' s
negotiations the Japanese have made known their. requirements
of coking coal an&amp;~ steaming coal up to the year 1980. This
information will enable the Australian Government to plan in
conjunction with Queensland coal producers and other members of
the Australian Coal Association for the further development of
existing mines, increases * in their labour force improvement in
rail transport and harbour coal loading and other shipping
facilities. The visit of Prime Minister Tanaka to Australia
confirmed these arrangements. Australian-Japanese trading
relations are at their highest level of trust, cordiality and
mutual benefit. . A 77-7-1 
-2-
Contrast the benefits that Labor has brought to Queensland
with the benefits Mr Bjelke-Petersen has refused. By refusing
to co-operate in our plans for a growth centre at Townsville, by
refusing to co-operate in our plans for land acquisition to bring
down the price of land, Mr Bjelke-Petersen has thrown away
million in Australian Government assistance to Queensland. Labor's
policies are not only brining in hundreds of millions of extra dollars
in export earnings. At the same time we are giving money to the
States on an unprecendented scale. Queensland has received more
from my Government than it received from any previous Government
in history. Yet Mr Bjelke-Petersen constantly whinges about the
harsh treatment meted out to him by the Labor Government. Last
financial year our total payments to Queensland totalled $ 739
million. Queensland received more than $ 382 per head of population
in 1973-74 compared with $ 343 per head in average payments to all
States. 6. Last year our grants for primary and secondary education
were up 145 per cent on the year before. Tertiary education was
up 165 per cent, technical education 110 per cent, welfare housing
per cent, Aboriginal advancement nearly 30 per cent. Health
and welfare, roads and urban and regional development in Queensland
are all getting record amounts from my Government. We are doing
more for local government than any previous~ government in Canberra.
This year I approved grants totalling $ 56 million to local
government councils throughout Australia. Queensland's share
of these grants is $ 8.9 million. The Ipswich City Council is
receiving $ 364,000 the largest grant for any local council in
Queensland outside Brisbane itself.
7. One area of particular soci * al relevance to Ipswich is the
Austi lian Qovernment's decision to establish a community health
Centre _ n Ipswich. In the last financial year we provided a
total grc.. m of $ 78,719 to get the project off the ground. In
the current financial year 1974-75 the total grant is to be
$ 297,802 $ 258,577 for operating costs and a capital grant
of $ 39,225. That's what you get when you are fortunate enough to
have socially committed men like Bill Hayden and Doug Everingham
z: cting in your best interests in the vital fields of health
a1Ad welfare. You wouldn't get it from Mr Tooth. You didn't
get it from Mr Tooth.
8. 1 know the great hardship suffered by your district
from the fleod disaster earlier this year. All Australia
sympathised with you i. n that terrible experience. My Government
gave prompt and generous assistance for flood relief. We
immediately mobilised Civil Defence and Defence personnel and
resources. Our payments to Queensland, totalling $ 66 million
so far, are the biggest natural disaster outlay ever made by
an Australian Government. Queensland's expenditure on flood
relief from its own resources has amounted to $ 3.7 million.
We created a natural disasters organisation to * absorb
the existing Civil Defence arrangements and deal with the
long-term relief of flood and bushfire devastation. 
-3-
9. We must heed the lessons of the Queensland flood
disaster. Brisbane is a clear example of a city with inadequate
land use, planning and control, especially with respect to flood
plains. Since 1887 floods have occurred eight times in the
lower catchment areas, and as the city and vulnerable surrounding
districts grow, the risk increases. Despite the devastation
in the past, Queensland governments did little to prevent or
prepare for new emergencies. We can be ' sure that flooding
rains will occur again. We must act now to modify their
effects. In April I invited the Premier to submit a state-wide
plan for flood mitigation measures to be considered for
Australian Government assistance. The Premier supplied such
a plan. We have undertaken to consider requests for assistance
for any Queensland flood mitigation project as soon as we receive
full information on the proposed work. We have been prevented
from acting on requests for assistance because the Queensland
Government has not provided the information we need.
In July we asked the Queensland Premier to supply
more detailed information on the projects he had submitted.
We hoped to have a response by October. We are., still waiting.
We have received no detailed proposal at all about the
Bremmer River which is of most vital concern to the people
of Ipswich. Although the Australian Government allocated $ 66 million
for flood relief and restoration in Queensland it looks as though
only about $ 57 million will be spent.
My Government adheres to its goal of full employment.
We are taking action on many fronts to safeguard workers' jobs.
The increase in unemployment in Ipswich in recent months,
pardcicularly in the textile industry, has given us gveat concern.
Of 19k -enple in Ipswich out of work in the clothing and textile
industr.. 160 are receiving structural adjustment assistance
and a further 21 applications are being processed. We have acted
to curb imports of certain finished knitted and woven goods
from South East Asia. On 11 September a further referen~ ce was
sent to the textile authority covering yarns, knitted fabrics and.
towelling. The Government has received this report and is
considering its recommendations. On 26 August the Industries
*-ssistance Commission began public hearings to determine what
widcr as~ istance is required for the clothing, industry.
11. Only last Friday I sent a reference to * the Textiles
Authoriiy' within th~ e Industries Assistance Commission covering
a wide rancj of men' s, women' s, children's, and infant's clothing,
as well as hosiery an~ d gloves.
This action is being taken as a result of high and
rising levels of imports and apparent total availability of such
goods on the Australian market substantially in excess of
previous levels.
The reference seeks the advice of the. Textiles Authority
on whether action should be taken to restrain imports either under
the GATT textile arrangement or, if necessary to advise on any
other measures considered desirable. / 14 
I have asked the Textiles Authority to repo---c-witkhin
days in relation -to certain shirts and pyjamas, and . within.
days -in respect of-the remainder.
I take the opportunity now * to invite manufacturers and
any other interested parties to start preparing submissiLoa_ to
the Textile Authority without delay. The Authority will arrange
to hold public hearings and details of these will shortly be
announced. 12. We have taken many other measures to relieve unemployment.
They are not just short-term palliative measures but far-sighted
schemes to bring help to deprived regions and make our industries
more efficient and resilient. On 23 September we announced a
special scheme of grants to towns outside the main metropolitan
areas, including subsidies to companies and grants to companies
or local bodies for the establishment of viable alternative
production and employment. Ipswich City Council has received
$ 808,000 since the introduction in September of the" Regional
Employment Development Scheme. This will provide new roadside
retaining walls, concrete channelling and footpaths. We have
approved 34 local projects to provide employment in Queensland
under our REDS scheme.
Another 15 have been given provisional approval pending
further discussions with local government bodies. Besides
providing employment, these schemes will bring permanent benefits
to Queensland cities, towns and tourist resorts. In October we
introduced the National Employment and Training System to
develop and rationalise our manpower resources. Since the
introduction of NEAT, 704 people in Queensland have undergone
training and retraining in new jobs. A further 1600 Queensland
applicants are-wai-ting to join the-scheme.'
13. -Never once have we relaxed our efforts to solve our
eco nomic problems problems we share with every comparable
country. Prices in Queensland are rising faster than in any
other State but Mr Bjelke-Petersen does nothing about it. He
campaigned against our referendum seeking powers to deal with
prices and refuses to use-the powers that the States alone possess.
He refuses to co-operate with us in redu,. high electricity
costs in Queensland. He refuses to let ANL ships operate between
Queensland ports,* thus-keepinqg'up -the high cost of freights. He
refuses to discuss our -offer-to take over the'State Railways
and relieve Queensland of this constant and growing burder, on
its budget thus keeping up the cost of railway freights and
fares. 14. Contrast this negative and unco-operative attitude with
the major economic decisions and initiatives I announced last
Tuesday. In my statement to Parliament I said:
' These measures add up to a very sub~ stantial relaxation
of monetary policy. Financial conditions can be
expected to become a good deal easier in the months
ahead than they have been in the recent past. In the
past week the Governor of the Reserve Bank has written
to the banks requesting them to increase appreciably
their rate of new lending and I would expect to see a
prompt response by the banks some savings banks are
already stepping up the rate of their housing loan
approvals.' e7-7.. 
We are increasing the real purchasing value of takehome
pay by cutting income tax. These tax cuts are part of our
plan for the reintroduction of cost of living adjustments for
wage and salary earners. Wage indexation will ensure that the
real wages of employees are protected in the years ahead. In
the transition period the value of wages will be preserved by
the tax cuts.
16. In Queensland the only people whose wages have been
subject to indexation so far are Members of Parliament.
I ask Queenslanders to contrast our support of cost of living
adjustments for all wage and salary earners with the outright
opposition of the Liberal-Country Party to the applications
for wage indexation now before the Arbitration Commission.
This contrast between the Labor Party and the Liberal-Country
parties will be clear for all to see when the Australian
Government representative speaks in support of cost of living
adjustments before the Arbitration Commission and the
Queensland Government representative opposes them. 



PRIMIE M~ IIM
SPEECH NOTES FOR MT.. ISA.
11T. ISA ** NOVEMBER 23
1. THIS IS MY FIRST STAY AS PRIME MINISTER IN
YOUR RICH AND REMARKABLE CITY. FEW CITIES COPE SO
WELL WITH THE PROBLEMS OF ISOLATION$ YOUR PROSPERITY IS
GUARANTEED BY-VAST NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE UNIQUESPIRIT
OF YOUR PEOPLE. AUSTRALIANS EVERYWHERE RESPECT'.
THE VIGOR, THE FORTITUDE, THE STRONG COMMUNAL PRIDEI FOR
WHiICH MT. ISA IS FAMOUS.
2. FROM THE BEGINNING my GOVERNMENT HAS-GIVEN
THE HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTHERN,
AUSTRALIA, WE CREATED A DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT.
HEADED BY MY COLLEAGUE REX PATTERSON. WE ESTABLISHED THE
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL. WE ARE UNDERTAKING A
THOROUGH STUDY OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS OF THE NOR TH-WEST
OF QUEENS. ND STRETCHING FROM MOUNT ISA TO THE GULF OF
CARPENTARIA A REGION WITH GREAT BEEF AND FISHERIES
POTENTIAL AND RICH IN MINERALS INCLUDING LEAD, ZINC, COPPER,
URANIUM AND PHOSPHATES.' THE STUDY WILL HELP US INTEGRATE ALL
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE REGION, RATIONALISE TRANSPORT
U COSTS AND CO-ORDINATE THE PROVISION OF POWER AND ESSENTIAL
PUBL SERVICES. PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF YOUR WATER RESOURCES
IS ESSENTIAL TO THE FUTUR . E OF MT. ISA. WE HAVE RECOGNISED
THAT NEED. ON 11 APRIL 1" 4 AN AGREEMENT WAS SIGNED BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE OtIEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
FOR A LOAN UP TO $ 2 MILLION TO COVER ADDITIONAL COSTS TO
BUILD THE JULIUS DAM FOR THE MT. ISA. WATER SUPPLY. THE
AGREEMENT WAS IN RESPONSE TO A REQUEST BY THE PREM. IER TO
THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT UNDER THE OLD NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM. 2/ 
2
LEGISLATION AUTHORISING THE LOAN HAS BEEN PASSED BY THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. A FURTHER REQUEST FOR $ 14.8 MILLION TO COVER THE
MT. ISA CITY COUNCIL'S SHARE OF THE COST OF THE DAM IS TO BE
DISCUSSED AT THE NEXT MEETING OF THE SCREENING COMMITTEE OF
THE NATIONAL WATER PROGRAM. I KNOW OF YOUR DEEP CONCERN
ABOUT THIS PROJECT. MR JACK SHEPHERD, THE LABOR CANDIDATE
AND ALD. TONY MCGRADY HAVE MADE STRONG REPRESENTATIONS
TO THE GOVERNMENT ABOUT THE SCHEME. THE GOVERNMENT WILL
DO ALL IT CAN TO SEE THAT DAM IS COMPLETED QUICKLY.
4I. WE WANT TO ENSURE THE PROPER DEVELOPMENT OF
MT. ISA'S MINERAL RESOURCES COPPER, LEAD, ZINC AND
PHOSPHATES. IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT-THESE RESOURCES ARE
EFFICIENTLY TRANSPORTED TO COASTAL PORTS, SMELTERS OR
REFINERIES AND MY COLLEAGUE REX CONNOR IS CONSIDERING
A PROPOSAL TO UPGRADE THE RAILWAY BETWEEN DUCHESS
MILES ' ITH OF PIT. ISA) AND TOWNSVILLE. THE EXISTING LINE
IS BEING V -D TO CAPACITY AND IS SUBJECT TO FLOODING.-
RECONSTRUCTION OF THE LINE SHOULD MAKE POSSIBLE A
SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE-IN PHOSPHATE PRODUCTION. AT PRESENT
AUSTRALIA IMPORTS 2.8 MILLION TONS OF PHOSPHATE A YEAR.
THE 6OVERNMENT BELIEVES PHOSPHATES COULD BECOME ONE OF
OL' MAJOR MINERAL EXPORTS, PERHAPS OUTSTRIPPING LEAD,
COPPL,. AND ZINC. SUCH AN INDUSTRY WILL SUBSTANTIALLY
ASSIST " R BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, INCREASED PHOSPHATE
SUPPLIES WILL ENABLE" US TO BOOST PRODUCTION OF WHEAT
AND OTHER GRAINS. 93/ t 
To FURTHER IMPROVE MT. ISA'S TRANSPORT LINKS.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL HELP BUILD THE LANDSBOROUGH
HIGHWAY FROM MT. ISA TO BRISBANE AS A FULL-SCALE ALL
WEATHER ROAD. THIS ROAD WILL BE PART OF OUR NATIONAL
HIGHWAYS PROGRAM, FOR WHICH WE ARE PROVIDING $ 1.126 MILLION
TO THE STATES OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS. MT. ISA WILL
S THUS BE LINKED EVENTUALLY BY FIRST-CLASS HIGHWAYS TO
BRISBANE, SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. NO STATE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
ABLE TO BUILD THIS HIGHWAY SYSTEM DESPITE THE MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS THEY HAVE RECEIVED FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FOR ROADS, MY GOVERNMENT WILL SEE THE JOB IS DONE:. I KNOW
PARTS OF THE EXISTING ROAD FROM MT. ISA TO BRISBANE ARE
-IN BAD REPAIR. As FAR AS POSSIBLE WE WILL GIVE PRIORITY
TO THESE SECTIONS. WE WILL SPEND $ 24 MILLION IN QUEENSLAND ON
NORTHERN BEEF EXPORT ROADS OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS.
IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT
PROM " D IN 1972 TO MAKE ALL QUEENSLAND STATE HIGHWAYS FULL
BITUMEN OfS BY 1975. THIS WILL NOT BE DONE. THE BITUMEN
SURFACE OF THE FLINDERS HIGHWAY FROM MiT. ISA TO TOWNSVILLE
NOW HAS A TARGET DATE FOR COMPLETION IN 1976.
6. THE LABOR GOVERNMENT WANTS EVERY CITY AND
RFGION TO PROVIDE AMENITIES AND SERVICES TO ITS CITIZENS
CO., F ABLE' WITH THE BEST IN . AUSTRALIA. TO' REDUCE INEQUALITIES
BEThCEN REGIONS WE EMPOWERED THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO
RECOMMEND " ANTS FOR. LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES ON THE BASIS OF
COMPARATIVE NEED. MT. ISA IS RECEIVING $ 250,000 FROM THE
GRANTS COMMISSION AND CLONCURRY $ 86,000. 3114/ 11111 
7. THESE GRANTS ARE HEAVILY IN FAVOUR OF RURAL
AREAS. BRISBANE HAS RECEIVED $ 3.12 A HEAD FROM THE GRANTS
COMMISSION GRANTS, WHILE RURAL AND PROVINCIAL CITIES
AND COUNCILS ARE RECEIVING $ 6.23 A HEAD. THIS GIVES THE
LIE TO ANY CLAIM THAT WE ARE FAVORING URBAN AREAS AT
THE EXPENSE OF THE COUNTRY DWELLER. WE ARE MAKING BIG
GRANTS FOR SPORTING AND RECREATION FACILITIES IN QUEENSLAND
CITIES. MT. ISA IS RECEIVING $ 115,000 FOR A COMMUNITY
RECREATION CENTRE. THIS IS EASILY THE BIGGEST SINGLE
GRANT FOR A QUEENSLAND CITY FOR THIS PURPOSE, TOTAL SPORTING
GRANTS TO QUEENSLAND AMOUNT TO $ 536,200.
8. A REGIONAL OFFICE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
SOCIAL SECURITY WILL BE OPENED AT MT. ISA AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE PROBABLY BEFORE 30 JUNE NEXT YEAR.
THE MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SECURITY, MR BILL
HAYDEN, AND HIS DEPARTMENT ARE KEENLY AWARE OF THE
DIFFICULTIES FACING RESIDENTS OF MT. ISA CLAIMING PENSIONS
AND BPNIFEFITS. A SOCIAL WORKER WILL BE INCLUDED AMONG THE
STAFF Ot-TH' MT. ISA OFFICE. THERE ARE 340 AGED PENSIONERS,
133 INVALID PENSIONERS, 123 WIDOW PENSIONERS, AND 3,929
FAMILIES RECEIVING CHILD ENDOWMENT PAYMENTS IN THE AREA.
9. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. IS CONSIDERING AN
APDLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR A 34-BED HOSTEL FOR
THL " RE OF AGED PEOPLE IN MT. ISA. THE APPLICATION IS ON
BEHALF OF THE MT. ISA MEMORIAL GARDEN SETTLEMENT FOR THE AGED.
THE PROP. TO ERECT THE GARDEN SETTLEMENT HAS BEEN HEAVILY
SUPPORTED BY K. ISA MINES AND THE UNIONS. THE ESTIMATED
COST OF THE PROJECT IS +-371,000, DISCUSSIONS ARE TAKING
PLACE BETWEEN THE MEMORIAL GARDEN SETTLEMENT ORGANISATION
AND THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY TO ARRANGE THE
TRANSFER OF HOSTEL BED ENTITLEMENT FROM ANOTHER ORGANISATION
TO ENABLE A GRANT TO BE MA'DE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTEL ACT
WHEN THE RELEVANT LEGISLATION HAS BEEN PASSED. 
ABOUT $ 170,000 HAS BEEN RAISED FOR THE PROJECT
IN THE NT. ISA AREA. THIS IS A TREMENDOUS EFFORT, MR
HAYDEN HAS INSTRUCTED THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY
TO GOVE THE FULLEST POSSIBLE SUPPORT TO THE PROJECT.
MY COLLEAGUE LIONEL MURPHY, THE ATTORNEYGENERAL,
ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY THAT ONE OF TWO NEW REGIONAL
BRANCHES IN QUEENSLAND OF THE LEGAL AID SERVICE WILL
BE AT MT. ISA.
11. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS IN QUEENSLAND
ARE THE HIGHEST IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES,' THE BJELKEPETERSEN
GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN
SEEKING WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH ELECTRICITY COSTS
HELP PUSH UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
THE BJELKr--PETERSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE ITS WIDE
POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM.
THE PEOPLE OF MT. ISA VOTED YES IN THE PRICES REFERENDUM LAST
YEAR. THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS IGNORED THEIR
EXPRES-9) WISH FOR GOVERNMENT ACTION TO RESTRAIN PRICES.
12. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN OVERWHELMINGLY
GENEROUS TO QUEENSLAND IN ITS FINANCIAL ALLOCATIONS.
QUEENSLAND HAS RECEIVED MORE FROM US THAN IT HAS RECEIVED
FROM ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA, OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS
TO QUFENSLAND IN THE LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WERE $ 739 MILLION
-OR $ 382 PER HEAD COMPARED WITH AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO ALL
STATES 3L5 PER HEAD. 
6
13. I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN'S
OBSTINATE REFUSAL TO CO-OPERATE WITH US IN PROJECTS FOR
THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND AND THE BENEFIT OF HER
CITIZENS. HE HAS SPURNED OUR EFFORTS TO MAKE TOWNSVILLE
A GROWTH J. EHE HAS. SPURNED 0UeR--&amp; F-FVNDS FOR LAND
STABILISATION, HE HAS REFUSED TO HOLD DISCUSSIONS ON
OUR OFFER OF FUNDS FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT. MR
BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS THROWN AWAY $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL
FUNDS FOR THIS STATE. HIS ATTITUDE IS AT ODDS . WITH
THAT OF ALL THE LIBERAL PREMIERS AND ON MANY ISSUES, SUCH
AS ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS, WITH THE ATTITUDE OF A FORMER
LIBERAL PRIME MINISTER, MR GORTON.
14., QUEENSLAND'S ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES ARE FLAGRANTLY
RIGGED AGAINST LABOR, IT IS NOT JUST BRISBANE VOTERS WHO
ARE DISADVANTAGED BUT PEOPLE IN PROVINCIAL CITIES LIKE
MT. ISA. HERE YOU HAVE 16,002 ELECTORS', THAT IS ALMOST
EXACTLY THE SAME AS THE AVERAGE ENROLMENT IN BRISBANE
SE" TS ( 16,059). You HAVE CONSIDERABLY MORE THAN THE AVERAGE
NUMB-ELECTORS ENROLLED IN ALL PROVIIICIAL CITY SEATS
( 15,510), MUCH MORE THAN THE AVERAGE IN THE COUNTRY ZONE
( 11,215), AND NEARLY TWICE THE AVERAGE NUMBER IN THE
WESTERN AND FPR NORTHERN ZONE fr; ISA PfCf"-;.
ARE PRIME VICTIMS OF 1iR LJELKE-' ETEkSEN'S SCANDALOUS
GERRYMANDERING, 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
AT CAIRNS AND MAREEBA, OLD.
24 NOVEMBER, 1974
1. THERE ARE FEW CITIES WHICH I VISIT MORE OFTENWHETHER
FOR BUSINESS OR PLEASURE THAN CAIRNS. IN
MAY I OPENED YOUR NEW CIVIC CENTRE AND CULTURAL
COMPLEX SYMBOLIC OF THE GROWTH AND PROSPERITY
OF THIS CITY AND YOUR REGION. SINCE THEN WE HAVE
DONE A GREAT DEAL-MORE FOR THE WELFARE AND PROGRESS
OF CAIRNS. WE HAVE MADE A GRANT OF $ 18,750 TOWARDS
YOUR BASKETBALL STADIUM AS PART OF my GOVERNMENT' S
DRIVE TO EXPAND SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. WE HAVE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS
BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. UNDER OUR PROPOSALS
CAIRNS CITY COUNCIL IS RECEIVING $ 176,000 AND
MAREEBA IS* RECEIVING $ 180,000 ON THE RECOMMENDATION
OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THESE GRANTS ARE GIVEN
WITHOU T INTEREST; THEY NEED NOT BE REPAID. THERE
ARE NO STRINGS ATTACHED. THEY CAN BE SPENT BY THE
LOCAL AUTHORITIES AS THEY SEE FIT TO IMPROVE THE
SERVICES AND AMENITIES AVAILABLE TO THE COMMUNITY.
2. IT IS A GREAT PLEASURE IN THIS CAMPAIGN TO BE SUPPORTING
RAY JONES, THE MEMBER FOR CAIRNS, AND BILL WOOD, THE
MEMBER FOR BARRON RIVER. THEY WILL BE VALUABLE
MEMBERS OF A NEW STATE GOVERNMENT LED BY MY FRIEND
AND COLLEAGUE PERC TUCKER. As SHADOW-MINISTER FOR
TRANSPORT, RAY JONEt WILL COOPERATE' WITH MY GOVERNMENT
TO IMPLEMENT OUR PLANS FOR A COMPREHENSIVE
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS SYSTEM 2 l 
2
3. UNDER LABOR'S PROPOSALS A HIGH-GRADE ALL-WEATHER HIGHWAY WILL
LINK CAIRNS WITH BRISBANE AND EVENTUALLY WITH SYDNEY
AND MELBOURNE. DESPITE OPPOSITION OBSTRUCTION WE HAVE
PASSED THE NECESSARY LEGISLATION TO PROVIDE $ 1,126
MILLION FOR OUR NATIONAL ROADS PROGRAM OVER THE NEXT
4k THREE YEARS. WE ARE THE FIRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT TO
UNDERTAKE THIS ESSENTIAL PROGRAM. NO': STATE GOVERNMENT
HAS HAD THE RESOURCES TO DO IT ALONE. No PREVIOUS
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CARED ENOUGH TO DO IT EVEN THOUGH
THEY HAD THE NECESSARY CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS. WE ARE
USING THOSE POWERS. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH THE JOB.
14. WE WANT TO SEE CAIRNS PROPERLY SERVED BY SHIPS OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN, ALONE
AMONG THE PREMIERS, HAS PREVENTED A. N. L. SHIPS OPERATING
BETWEEN PORTS WITHIN HIS OWN STATE. QUEENSLAND CITIES'
H'VE BEEN DENIED AN ESSENTIAL SHIPPING SERVICE SOLELY
BECAUSE OF THE OBSTINACY AND PREJUDICE OF THE OUTGOING
PREMIER, MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN' S ATTITUDE IS NOT SHARED
BY THE AUTHORITIES IN-CAIRNS. MR. BORZI, THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE CAIRNS HARBOUR BOARD, AND A FORMER STATE
CANDIDATE OF THE NATIONAL PARTY ( AS IT IS NOW CALLED)
,) ITD IN HIS 1973-74 ANNUAL REPORT:
" THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE'S WEEKLY CARGO
SERVICES TO AND FROM THE SOUTH BROUGHT
INCREASED TRADE AND REVENUE. UNFORTUNATELY
THE BOARD S SUPPORT OF MOVES TO HAVE A. N. L.
GRANTED THE PRIVILEGE OF CONDUCTING AN INTRASTATE
CARGO SERVICE HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL TO DATE." 
EARLIER TODAY I WAS IN WEIPA, A CITY THAT HAS SUFFERED
AS MUCH AS CAIRNS FROM MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN'S OBSTRUCTIONISM.
WE HAVE SEEN THE FARCICAL SITUATION OF FOREIGN
SHIPS CARRYING BAUXITE FROM WEIPA TO GLADSTONE BECAUSE
AN. L, SHIPS WERE PREVENTED FROM DOING THE JOB.
MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS REFUSED TO COOPERATE WITH US
IN OTHER PROJECTS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF QUEENSLAND
AND THE BENEFIT OF HER CITIZENS. HE HAS SPURNED OUR
OFFER OF FUNDS FOR LAND STABILISATION. HE HAS
REFUSED TO HOLD DISCUSSIONS ON OUR OFFER OF FUNDS
FOR ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT. MR. BJ'ELKE-PETERSEN HAS
THROWN AWAY $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL FUNDS FOR THIS
STATE, HIS ATTITUDE IS AT ODDS WITH THAT OF ALL THE
LIBERAL PREMIERS AND ON MANY ISSUES, SUCH AS ABORIGINAL
LAND RIGHTS, WITH THE ATTITUDE OF A FORMER LIBERAL
RIME MINISTER, MR. GORTON.
6. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS : N QUEENSLAND ARE THE
HIGHEST IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN
GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO COOPERATE WITH US IN SEEKING
WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH ELECTRICITY COSTS HELP
v,' 4 UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
THE BJELKE-PETFRSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE ITS WIDE
POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM. 
6A I1.~ HS~ iIU~ JTO COUP2M. ATE
IN OjR . LLANO F0iZ j" JjIL P -nfALT!', O I. A6lli.
I IiROTE TO ALL ThnS P., iiIIIRb O1-j 1T TL3a
OFFERING A TOTAL GLANT TO ALL ~ TTSW
11ILLI0ON -2O1t Ai~ q 1NTEP-RIl4. PROGiiAM
UP TO JUNE~ 1976. U1SAjD'AOiFL'
$ 160,000 Ill 1974-75 AND Q-700,000 IN
1975-76 TIL; S HIG' 1' ZTh~ h\ FOR, Y
STATE. TIZ OUTGOING PAi,. IL-11.3 NOT Yi'T
TOLD Uo' V512iTHER RE~ WILL ACC-*, PT OU'L OFF2,11
ALL OTHEiR STATE~ S .2XCJ2PT NEW/ SOUTH WALES
HlAVE3 ACCS;*' PTJED IT. 
7. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNZiNT HAS BIEZNOVtWLIdi
GENEROUS T3 QUEENSLAND IN IT; FINANCIAL, ALLOCATIONS.
QUEENISLAND HAS R. iCEIVED XOIcS FRi'i U6~ THA4N IT HIAE
RECEIVED FROM ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMN'T IN CANB3ERRA~.
OUR TOTAL PAYt1iNTS TO 2UEENSLAND IN ' il LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR WERE $ 739 MILLION or, $ 382 PER
HEAD COi. PARED WITH AVEIRA'GE PjAYPENTS TO ALL STATES
OF " o345 PER HEAD.
8. FROM THE BEGINNING MY GOVERNl--ENT HA6S GIVEN4 THE
HIGHEST PRIORITY TO THlE DEVELOPL*~ ENT O 0i x~ T1E2RNq
AUSTRAULIA. WE ATED A DEPARTNENT OF 110HTii{; RN
DEVELOPiNL2, NT HEADED BY IMY COLL EklUE REX RATTEiLS OS.
WE ESTAELISHED TIM, NORTHERN DE, 1VELOPPIEN'T COUNCIL.
WE ik1? E Ui. D2EATkKING A THOROUGH STuiJY OF TI. E, D. 2VELOPhi2UNT
PRO. SPECTS OF Thii' NOATH-WEST OIf QUEENSLAiD
STRETCHING FROM MOUNT I6A TO THEI GULF OF = AtPENTEi~ RIA,
WE ARE SPENDING 24 MILLION IN THE NEXT TIIL. EE YEARoS
ON EXPORT BEEF ROADS IN QUEENSLAND.
9. AS PART OF A RICIT AND Ili* PC. TA* 6 ; I AkGLICUJ1TURAt, REGION
C~ $ AND M! ArLZEBAk IAV--BE 4.3' ITTED 2Ke7 vil ~~ ID i
C-OVERNIET's RUR-AL POLICIES. IN OUi L ST BUliGET
OUl. Y ON RURA L AS I ST-NC-T ' JTALLED 0? 488 ILIuN
THERE A NET IN~~ 1IN OUI Al ET TO
AGIRICULTUlLE OF -388 ILI3 EiT-LC'. Th1973-74.
WE ARE SPENDING $ 56 l-ILLiON A" N AddlAj7lz lLT
LABOl-aTOñ lY A PROJE~ CT JF SOjU i1C-Xh MI* i: POr. TANCE-
TO ALL LIVESTOCK IiNDU6TRIES.
WE VL' OPENED UP NEW MARKET6 FOR T'RE, SUGAR I'fL4USTR?.*.
WE AR'-E NZGOTLj. f . NG A LON',*-TERM SUGAR CONTRACT WITH
CHINA WvOiLTH $ 50 i'ILIN AlAiYSIA HX"' ALSO SdHU4N
INTEl! REST IN LCNG-TERM SUGAR SALES WORTH
WE W4ILL CONTINUTE TO SEEK A NEW 1N'jERNATINAL UCAR
AGREE11ENT TO BRING~ EFFECTIVE XARKET MAqAGEINT TO
THE V1O16LD SU\ CAR TRADE. 
WE HAVE RETAINED TiE NITROG EINOUS PiRT-L6ER
SUBSIDY, WORTH i', BOUT $ 13 MILLION A Y2AR, TO
ASSIST SPECIALISE) REGIuNAL G1OWTH, ELU oURE
CONTINUED LOCAL PODUCTION AND TO ! LTA1N A IIIGL;
LEVEL OF SOIL FERTILITY.
11. WE ARE PARTICIPATING ON A DO LAR-FOR-DOLLAR
BASIS WITH QUEENSLAND IN A $ 720,000 PLOGIAN
FOR LOCUST CONTROL IN QUENSLAND.
12, TIE GOVENMENT RECOGNIS] ES THE Ii4PORTANCJi: E OF T"-E
TOBACCO INDUSTily TO YOUR ST. TE AN) T-E IMPORTANCE
OF MAREEBA TO THAT INDUSTRY.* TH, AVERAGE MINII4UN
AESERVE PRICE FOR LEAF OOLD AT AUCTION THIS YEAR
WAS INCREASED BY 36 CENTS TO 288.4 CENTS A KILOGRAM.
THE AVER. AGE PRICE ODTAIN2D AT AUC[ ION IN I-AREE13A
THIS YEAR ffi BEEN 295.13 CENTS. rJ1" GOVENi-MENT
WILL CONSIDER FURTHER PRICEi REVIEWS DURING THE
CUlt ITCY OF TiiiE FIVE-YEAh' TOBACCO ) TABILIIATION
PLAN ' iHICH BEGaN THIS YEAR.
HE M-iARKETING QUOTA FORL 1975 HAS 13ñ. SET AT
15,422,000 kg TIE SAME AS THIS YEAiR.
13. UNDER TH'LE LABOR GOV-R!\ wEi4T YuAVE S17EEN Ti W FIxCLT
SIGNI! 2? ICMLNT POST-Wic'W L i f-i KJY YEAR oi THE
INDEBTE1) NlcJS: S OF RURAL PRODUCEA6. 11%' 1971 THE
BUR. EAU OF AGMiICULT AL SCOiiOL. IC63 FE2O. TEJLT. T; LAT
7,570 AUSTRALIAN FA-iiERS APPLIED ñ Cit ASSISTiai: CE
THE I'iURL RECONbTitUCTION BOAtD. TILTS YEAR
TiL FIGUR E T" DOWN TO 523. 0006/... 
14. IN KEN VkIJTFid, 12M HlAViE T1' Hi . LLEST, BEL'T
INFORMED, h,, OST ACTIVE~ AND IW-iELLIGE11T MNi'I ) TER
EVEZ. APPOINTEDI TO AD1,11NIST. EJEk. Pilil-. . iAY IU~ X
IN CUR REL] iT Glt. S" li4 PAPER ON4 Liw'LL IN: DU'.-TRY
FAW, 4E1RS I1AVl* T1113 BL1-' ST AND iñ iOST CW-i.' H2 1 v 7
F~ OR INFOIU4E1 ( GOV-" RUWMNT PuLICIE6 ON
RUliAL INDUSTRY EVfl DRAiWN UP IN AUSTR~ ALIA.
IN OUR INflULTRIEi ASSIMTANCiE CONNL-. SION AWi
MWEi THE 1iOZ'T .1-, PEIZT AND) EFFICI -INT INSTALU~ LJT
FOR. GUAR~ ANTEEING THIS 6TAEiNGTH A1' ND SiTAID'LITY
OF OU,. * kUR-iL INDUSTftI,, S E~ VER APPOIN-. L" D IN
A,, U;
O1UNDJS FORc C F EX MM~ FAITH -Il TH-, FU-: Jt 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR CLERMONT AND EMERALD, QLD.
29 NOVEMBER 1974
1. IWAS LAST IN EMERALD -THIS RICH AND BEAUTIFUL REGION OF
CENTRAL WESTERN QUEENSLAND IN THE EARLY 1960' s. I REMEMBER
FONDLY THE HOSPITALITY OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS DISTRICT. LAST
WEEK THE NATIONAL PARTY SENT ME A TELEGRAM TELLING ME TO CANCEL
MY VISIT. I REPLIED PROMPTLY AND IN NO UNCERTAIN TERMS. I WILL
NOT BE DETERRED FROM MEETING AND DISCUSSING MATTERS OF IMPORTANCE
WITH QUEENSLANDERS BECAUSE OF A HANDFUL OF ROWDY DEMONSTRATORS
ORGANISED BY THE NATIONAL PARTY. THE HOOLIGANISM, THE ROWDINESS,
THE DOWNRIGHT OBSCENITY OF A FEW HOOLIGANS IS QUITE FOREIGN TO
QUEENSLAND. IT IS REJECTED BY THE VAST MAJORITY OF DECENT
PEOPLE OF THIS STATE.
2. I WELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO LEARN MORE ABOUT YOUR DISTRICT, YOUR
LOCAL NEEDS AND PROBLEMS. A CAMPAIGN IS A GOOD TIME TO GET A
MESSAGE AS WELL AS GIVING A MESSAGE. IT AMAZES ME THAT WE HEAR
SO MUCH SCARE TALK AND NONSENSE FROM MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN ABOUT
CENTRALISM, . OUR POLICIES ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT GIVE THE LIE TO"
THIS TALK. WE ARE DOING MORE TO HELP LOCAL COUNCILS UPGRADE
THEIR SERVICES AND AMENITIES THAN ANY GOVERNMENT BEFORE US.
THIS YEAR, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION, WE
APPROVED DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
TOTALLING % 56.3 MILLION. QUEENSLAND' S SHARE IS $ 8.9 MILLION.
EmERALD is RECEiviNG $ 92,000. No FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS EVER
GIVEN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BEFORE. AND THAT MONEY
CAN BE SPENT IN ANY WAY THE LOCAL COUNCILS WISH.
712 3 AIj1A4~ dL 7L 7 t0&amp; L4 ' Y .1s2 
REMEMBER WHAT OUR OPPONENTS USED TO SAY BEFORE WE AMENDED THE
GRANTS COMMISSION ACT TO MAKE THESE GRANTS POSSIBLE: CANBERRA
WOULD BE TAKING OVER LOCAL COUNCILS AND CONTROLLING THEIR
PURSE STRINGS. CANBERRA'S TENTACLES WOULD BE REACHING INTO
EVERY SHIRE AND MUNICIPALITY IN AUSTRALIA. YOU CAN SEE NOW
WHAT NONSENSE THAT WAS. OUR GRANTS ARE DIRECT, INTEREST-FREE$
NON-REPAYABLE. THERE ARE NO STRINGS ATTACHED TO THE WAY THE
MONEY IS USED.
3. OUR GENEROSITY TO QUEENSLAND IS NOT CONFINED TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
DESPITE ALL THE BLEATS AND PROTESTS FROM'YOUR OUTGOING PREMIER
WE HAVE GIVEN MORE MONEY TO THE STATE THAN ANY PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. OUR TOTAL PAYMENTS TO QUEENSLAND LAST YEAR WERE
$ 739 MILLION $ 382 PER HEAD OF POPULATION COMPARED WITH AVERAGE
PAYMENTS TO ALL STATES OF $ 34-5 PER HEAD. ANY BRAKE ON QUEENSLANDS
DEVELOPMENT IS NOT DUE TO US. IT IS DUE TO YOUR PREMIER.
HE HAS TURNED DOWN $ 50 MILLION IN FEDERAL FUNDS FOR GROWTH CENTRES
AND LAND STABILISATION. AND HE SPENDS THE MONEY WE GIVE HIM
MORE SLOWLY AND SPARINGLY THAN ANY OTHER STATE. WE CAN MAKE
MONEY AVAILABLE BUT WE CAN'IT SPEND IT ON OUR OWN. WE NEED THE
CO-OPERATION OF THE STATE.
1. WE HAVE GIVEN THE STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR WELFARE
HOUSING. ONLY THIS MONTH WE ALLOCATED A FURTHER $ 8 MILLION TO
QUEENSLAND IN ADDITION TO OUR EARLIER RECORD ALLOCATIONS WHEN
THEY SHOWED THEY HAD THEIR PLANS READY AND COULD SPEND THE MONEY.
THERE IS NO REASON WHY FURTHER FUNDS CANNOT BE SPENT THIS YEAR,
EXCEPT THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IS NOT PREPARED TO SPEND
THEM. SOUTH AUSTRALIA-WITH TWO-THIRDS YOU R POPULATION IS
SPENDING AT LEAST $ 35 MILLION MORE ON HOUSING THAN QUEENSLAND IS
MANAGING TO SPEND. ,3 
-3-
THIS ATTITUDE IS COSTING THE JOBS OF BUILDING WORKERS. IT IS
HOLDING BACK YOUR STATE.
MR,. BJELKE-PETERSEN REPEATEDLY TELLS US THAT HE WON'T TAKE OUR
MONEY, I KNOW HE'S ARELIGIOUS MAN BUT HE IS CARRYING RELIGION
TOO FAR WHEN HE TAKES A VOW OF POVERTY ON BEHALF OF QUEENSLAND.
6. WHEN YOUR CANDIDATE JIM TURNER INVITED ME TO VISIT YOUR DISTRICT
IT WAS BEFORE THIS ELECTION WAS ANNOUNCED HE TOLD ME SOMETHING I
OF YOUR PROBLEMS AS A COMPARATIVELY ISOLATED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
THERE IS, FOR EXAMPLE, THE PROBLEM OF HIGH TELEPHONE COSTS
AND DELAYS. MY COLLEAGUE REG BISHOP, THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL, IS
CONSIDERING A PROPOSAL FROM PERC TUCKER FOR A RADIO TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBER NETWORK LINKED TO THE NATIONAL TELEPHONE SYSTEM, YOU
CAN BE SURE THAT IF THIS SCHEME IS TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE WE WILL
GIVE IT CLOSE ATTENTION, OUR EXPERTS WILL LOOK AT IT AND SEE
IF IT OFFERS SOME ANSWERS TO THE NEEDS OF ISOLATED TELEPHONE
SUBSCRIBERS.
7. WE ARE PARTICIPATING ON A DOLLAR-FOR -DOLLAR BASIS WITH QUEENSLAND
IN A $ 720,000 PROGRAM FOR LOCUST CONTROL. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN
TRIED TO MISREPRESENT OUR ATTITUDE TO THIS PROBLEM BY TELLING THE
PEOPLE OF QUEENSLAND WE WERE RESTRICTING OUR AID TO ONLY ONE
TYPE OF LOCUST. I GAVE THE LIE TO THAT ALLEGATION. OUR FUNDS
WILL HELP ERADICATE ANY SORT OF LOCUST WHICH DAMAGES AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION. I WAS GLAD TO HAVE A LETTER RECENTLY FROM MR. L. V.
PRICE, PRESIDENT OF THE QUEENSLAND GRAINGROWERS' ASSOCIATION,
EXPRESSING HIS APPRECIATION OF OUR OFFER TO ASSIST QUEENSLAND'S
LOCUST ERADICATION PROGRAM, 
HE WROTE: " YOUR GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL COMMITMENT TO ASSIST THIS
PLAN IS MOST WELCOME AND WILL MAK; E A REALLY CONSTRUCTIVE CONTROL
EFFORT POSSIBLE.,
8. WE ARE STEPPING UP BEEF ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN QUEENSLAND. IN THE
NEXT THREE YEARS WE WILL BE SPENDING $ 24 MILLION ON BEEF EXPORT
ROADS IN NORTHERN AUSTRALIA. FEDERAL LIBERAL-COUNTRY GOVERNMENTS
GROSSLY NEGLECTED BEEF ROADS, WE ARE UPGRADING THE BEEF ROAD
BETWEEN CLERMONT AND CHARTERS TOWERS. THIS IMPORTANT ROAD
CONNECTS THE CATTLE BREEDING AREAS IN QUEENSLAND WITH THE FATTENING
COUNTRY OF THE BRIGALOW AND THE CENTRAL WEST. WE MADE A SPECIAL
GRANT OF $ 3 MILLION TO ALLOW THE BITUMEN TO PROCEED SOUTH AS FAR
AS MOUNT DOUGLAS. THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IS DOING NOTHING
TO IMPROVE THE ROAD.
ON 30 AUGUST 1973, MY COLLEAGUE REX PATTERSON WROTE TO COUNCILLOR
TURNER OF THE BELYANDO SHIRE COUNCIL: " ON THE SUBJECT OF THE
CHARTERS TOWERS-CLERMONT ROAD, I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT I AM AWARE OF
ITS IMPROTANCE TO THE BEEF INDUSTRY AS WELL AS FOR A NUMBER OF
OTHER PRUPOSES SUCH AS PROVIDING THE RESIDENTS OF THE AREA WITH
A MUCH NEEDED IMPROVED LINKING ROAD AND AS AN AID TO TOURIST
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT. As I MENTIONED, THE CHARTERS-TOWERS
CLERMONT ROAD IS RECEIVING CLOSE CONSIDERATIONIN THE INVESTIGATIONS
NOW IN PROGRESS FOR A POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF THE BEEF ROADS
SCHEME BEYOND 30 JUNE 1974,"
OUR EXTRA GRANT WAS THE RESULT OF THAT EXTENTION OF THE BEEF
ROADS SCHEME. 
9. ALTHOUGH RURAL ELECTRICITY COSTS IN QUEENSLAND ARE THE HIGHEST
IN ALL THE EASTERN STATES, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED T(
CO-OPERATE WITH US IN SEEKING WAYS TO REDUCE THESE COSTS. HIGH
ELECTRICITY COSTS HELP PUSH UP PRICES OVER A WIDE RANGE OF GOODS
AND SERVICES. THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO USE
ITS WIDE POWERS TO CONTROL PRICES AND RESISTED OUR ATTEMPTS TO
OBTAIN COMMONWEALTH POWER OVER PRICES BY REFERENDUM.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS REFUSED TO CO-OOPERATE IN OUR PLANS FOR
A SOIL CONSERVATION PROGRAM. IWROTE TO ALL THE PREMIERS ON
17 SEPTEMBER OFFERING A TOTAL GRANT TO ALL STATES OF $ 2.5 MILLION
FOR AN INTERIM PROGRAM FOR UP TO JUNE 1976. QUEENSLAND WAS
OFFERED $ 160,000 IN 1974-75 AND $ 700,000 IN 1975-76 -THE
HIGHEST AMOUNTS FOR ANY STATE. THE OUTGOING PREMIER HAS NOT
YET TOLD US WHETHER HE WILL ACCEPTOUR OFFER.
11, UNDER THE LABOR GOVERNMENT WE HAVE SEEN THE FIRST SIGNIFICANT
POST-WAR FALL FOR MANY YEARS IN THE INDEBTEDNESS OF RURAL
PRODUCERS. IN 1971 THE BUREAU OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS
REPORTED THAT 7,570 AUSTRALIAN FARMERS APPLIED FOR ASSISTANCE
FROMiTHE RURAL RECONSTRUCTION BOARD. THIS YEAR THE FIGURE IS
DOWN To 523.
12. OUR DtCISION; Y TO ESTABLISH AN ANIMAL HEALTH LABORATORY AT A COST
OF $ 56 MILLION WILL HELP THE LOCAL BEEF INDUSTRY AND ALL
LIVESTOCK INDUSTRIES IN AUSTRALIA, ./ 6 
-6-
13. THE FITZROY REGION HERE IN CENTRAL WESTERN QUEENSLAND WAS ONE
OF THREE AREAS IN QUEENSLAND WHICH WE PROPOSED AS REGIONAL
GROWTH CENTRES IN OUR ELECTION CAMPAIGN IN 1972. MR. BJLEKEPETERSEN
HAS BLOCKED OUR INITIAL PLANS TO DEVELOP TOWNSVILLE AS A
GROWTH CENTRE.
i14. WE ARE AWARE OF THE SPECIAL-. EDUCATIONAL PROBLEMS OF ISOLATED
CHILDREN IN REGIONS SUCH AS YOURS, WE INTRODUCED A SPECIAL
SCHEME LAST YEAR TO HELP THESE CHILDREN. THIS YEAR WE HAVE
BUDGETED TO SPEND $ 11.5 MILLION THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. INCLUDING
$ 3.3 MILLION ON QUEENSLAND FOR THIS PURPOSE. WE ARE ELPING
2964l QUEENSLAND FAMILIES, AND 41899 QUEENSLAND cHiLDREN, wiTH OUR
ISOLATED CHILDREN'IS EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM THIS YEAR. 



BRISBANE PRESS CLUB
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISfER
29 NOVEMBER 1974
IN THIS CAMPAIGN, I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO
THE SELFISH AND SHORT-SIGHTED POLICIES OF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT, QUEENSLAND'S FAILURE TO CO-OPERATE WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DEPRIVED THE STATE OF $ 50 MILLION
IN MUCH-NEEDED FUNDS AND RETARDED ITS DEVELOPMENT. THIS
FAILURE TO CO-OPERATE IS NOT CONFINED TO SPECIFIC PROJECTS
SUCH AS . AND COMMISSIONS AND GROWTH CENTRES, IT IS
REFLECTED IN A GENERAL INDIFFERENCE ON QUEENSLAND'S PAST
TO THE GREAT ECONOMIC PROBLEMS CONFRONTING THE NATION.
Stl'H A PROBLEM IS UNEMPLOYMENT. THE SAD FACT IS THAT
UNEMPLIY: ENT IN QUEENSLAND IS RISING FASTER THAN ANYWHEr
ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. MY GOVERNMENT IS DOING ITS BEST
CHECK UNEMPLOYMENT. MR BJELKl--PETERSEI. IS DOING NOThi. G,
THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT THAT GOVERN;.,. NT EXPENDITURF
IS IMPORTANT IN PROVIDING JOBS. IT IS DIRECTLY IM: ORTANT
THROUGh -iE PEOPLE THE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYS IN THE PLBLIC
SERVICE; IT IS IND -CTLY IMPORTANT BECAUSE OF THE
CONTRACTORS WHO WORK ON MMENT PROJECTS AN: THROUGH
THE EXTRA DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES CREATED BY ANY
KIND OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE. STATE GOVERNMENTS'
EXPENDITURE IS AS IMPORTANT IN CREATING JOBS AS EXPENDITURE
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. 
QUEENSLANDERS SHOULD ASK THEMSELVES WHY " I1i"
INCREASE IN UNEMPLOYMENT HAS BEEN MOST RAPID IN THIS
STATE. I BELIEVE THE TWO MOST SIGNIFICANT FACTORS ARE
THE FAILURE OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO CO-OPERATE
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE INEFFICIENCY
OF THIS STATE GOVERNMENT IN SPENDING EXTRA MONEY WE
HAVE GIVEN THEM. QUEENSLAND HAS THE WORST UNEMPLOYMENT
IN AUSTRALIA BECAUSE THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT IS
UNWILLING OR UNABLE TO SPEND AMOUNTS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS WILLING TO OFFER.
THROUGHOUT THIS CAMPAIGN I HAVE REFERRED TO
TWO AREAS IN WHICH THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT,
UNLIKE THEIR COUNTERPARTS IN OTHER STATES WHETHER LIBERAL,
LABOR OR COUNTRY PARTY, HAS REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE WITH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WIL' NOT ALLOW SPECULATORS TO REAP EXCESSIVE LAND
DEVELOP, '. IT PROFITS. WE THEREFORE INSIST ON LAND PRICE
STABILISATION IN OUR PROGRAM FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
GROWTH CENTRES IN OUR PROGRAM FOR THE ACQUISITION
OF LAND TO BE DEVELOPED BY A JOINT AUSTRALIAN-STATE
" RNMENT COMMISSION AND SOLD AT COST. WE 1ST THAT
LAND SPECULATORS SHOULD NOT PROFIT FROM GOVERNMENT DECISIO
OF THIS OBVTOUSLY THE DECLARATION OF A REGION AS
A GROWTH CENTRE INCRL ' FS LAND PRICES. ,, 13 
-3
S-35
AI. L WE ASK MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TO DO iis ro sir-: : I. LY
TIHE SAME AGREEMENTS, IN PRECISELY TIHE SAME TERMS, AS
THOSE SIGNED BY SIR IOI: RT ASKIN, MR IHAMER AND) ' iR CHARLES
COURT AND ADMINISTERED IN SOME CASES BY COUNTRY PARTY
MINISTERS, NONE OF THESE PEOPLE CAN BE DESCRIBED AS
CENTRALISTS. THEY COULD NOT FIND UNACCEPTABLE CONDITIONS
OR HIDDEN TERMS IN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OFFER,
THE PREMIERS OF THE OTHER LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY STATES
HAVE ACCEPTED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S ARGUMENT THAT
THESE PROGRAMS SHOULD NOT BE AFFECTED BY LAND SPECULATION
WHICH WOULD INCREASE THE COSTS OF TIHE PROGRAMS AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE AUSFRALIAN TAXPAYER. THE RESULT IS
MILLION LOST TO THIS STATE $ 50 MILLION WHICH EVEN
NOW WOULD BE REFLECTED IN YOUR STATE'S ECONOMY IN THE
FORM OF EXTRA DEMAND FOR GOODS AND SERVICES AND DIRECT
EMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY. ONE CANNOT SAY
PRE-TSELY HOW MANY JOBS THIS WOULD MEAN TO QUEENSLAND
BUT THE 7 3URE WOULD BE COUNTED IN THOUSANDS.
MANY OTHER JOBS ARE BEING LOSI" TO OUEENSLA'. D
BECAUSE OF THE INEFFICIENCY OF THE STATE GOVERNMLNT IN
" SPONDING TO OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE. IHERE AR LARGE
NUMBER OF SEPARATE EXPENDITURE AREAS OF THE AUSTRALi
GOVERNMEI WHICH ARE DESIGNED TO TOP UP EXPENDITURES
OF THE STATE GOVERNML TO PROVIDE FURTHER FUNJDS IN
AREAS WHICH ARE THE PRIMAR, , i;"' NSIBILITY OF S,' TE
GOVERNMENTS. To SPEND MONEY ON SUCH PROGRAMS THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MUST RELY ON THE ADMINISTRATION
AND THE PLANNING OF EACH STATE GOVERNMENT. ,/ 4 
4
BEFORE WE CAN COMMIT SUCH FUNDS TO QUIJEENSLAND, THE
QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT MUST FIRST DRAW UP PLANS
FOR NEW PROJECTS AND BE PREPARED TO IMPLEMENT THEM AS
QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
LET ME GIVE ONE EXAMPLE. IN JUNE OF THIS
YEAR I GAVE ALL STATE GOVERNMENTS A BLANK CHEQUE ON
WELFARE HOUSING. I SAID THEN, AND I REPEAT IT NOW,
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE ANY AMOUNTS
FOR WELFARE HOUSING THAT THE STATES ARE ABLE TO SPEND.
WE HAVE HONOURED THAT UNDERTAKING AND ONLY THIS MONTH
WE ALLOCATED A FURTHER $ 8 MILLION FOR QUEENSLAND FOR
THIS PURPOSE WHEN THEY SHOWED THEY HAD THE. PLANS
READY AND COULD SPEND THE MONEY. THIS YEAR $ 35.4 MILLION
WILL BE SPENT IN QUEENSLAND UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH STATE
HOUSING GRANT. THIS COMPARES WITH AN AMOUNT PAID LAST
YE. R OF $ 17.4 MILLION.
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IS
WORSE IN QUEENSLAND THAN IN ANv OTHER S" ATE, IT SHOb,.
NOT EXIST, AND IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT WERE READY
TO SPEND FURTHER FUNDS ON WELFARE HOUSING iT ' UULD inT
EXIST. THERE IS NO REASON WHY FURTHER FUND-ANNG"; zE
SPENi TYEAR, EXCEPT THAT THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMU: T
IS NOT PREPIED TO Sø END THEM. IT DOES NOT H:.' VE THE
PLANS TO ACCEPT THE AUS, AI TA , OVERNMENT'S BL. C.-: rUE, 
OTHER STATES DO. IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA LAST YEAR, WE lNT
$ 32.75 MILLION UNDER THIS AGREEMENT AND FOR THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR WE WILL SPEND $ 45.36 MILLION. THAT IS, FOR THE
TWO YEARS OF THIS AGREEMENT SOUTH AUSTRALIA WITH A
POPULATION TWO-THIRDS THAT OF QUEENSLAND IS ABLE TO
ACCEPT AND SPEND MORE THAN $ 35 MILLION MORE THAN
QUEENSLAND, IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT WERE AS
EFFICIENT AS IT SHOULD BE, THE $ 88 MILLION SPENT IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA SHOULD CONSTITUTE ONLY TWO-THIRDS OF
THE AMOUNT SPENT IN QUEENSLAND DURING THESE TWO YEARS.
FOR THESE TWO YEARS, QUEENSLAND SHOULD HAVE RECEIVED
OVER $ 80 MILLION 11ORE THAN IT RECEIVED IN HOUSING GRANTS
FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THERE WOULD BE NO
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IF THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT HOUSING AUTHORITIES WERE AS EFFECTIVE AS
THOSE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
THE COMPARISON I HAVE MADE IN WELFARE HOUSING
CAN BE REPEATED AGAIN AND AGAIN, IN CONTRAST WITH TF
SOUTH AUSTRALI. A GOVERNMENT, THE QUEENS_.\ ND GOVERNMENT
IS APPARENTLY UNABLE TO SPENDAUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IONEY TO THE SAME DEGREE THAT SOUTH AUSTRAL;-CAN,
PtRTICULARLY IN THE NEW PROGRAMS THAT WE HAVE INTRO2UCED,
S/ 6 
-6-
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE HAS GOT OFF LIE GRCLD
MORE SLOWLY THAN THAT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND THIS DEPENDS
COMPLETELY ON THE ABILITY OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT TO
PREPARE PLANS AND ADMINISTER PROJECTS. AREAS IN WHICH
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN SPEND MORE OR ABOUT THE
SAME AMOUNT AS THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT INCLUDE HOSPITALS,
COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES, DENTAL HEALTH SCHEMES, MENTAL
HEALTH SCHEMES, HOMES AND HOSTELS FOR AGED PERSONS,
TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT
THERE HAS BEEN A MASSIVE INJECTION OF AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FUNDS FOR THE BUILDING OF SCHOOLS. BY
NOVEMBER 18 SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAD REQUESTED 32% OF ITS
ALLOCATION FOR THE YEARS 1974-75 BUT QUEENSLAND HAD
REQUESTED ONLY 18% THE LOWEST OF ANY STATE IN AUSTRALIA,
IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAD REQUESTED THE SAME
PROP -' rON OF EDUCATION GRANTS AS THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN.
GOVERNMEN. AS ALREADY REQUESTED IT WOULD HAVE RECEIVED
IN EXCESS OF $ 3 MILLION MORE FOR SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION,
BECAUSE OF ITS INi,_. ILITY TO DO SO, ITS INABILITY TO PLAN
Ar'D ADMINISTER ITS PROJECTS AS EFFICIENTLY AS THE SOUTH
AL TR'LIAN GOVERNMENT, THESE FURTHER FUNDS WIt' -3T
BE SPENT. SCHOOLS WHICH MIGHT HAVE OPENED AT THE
BEGINNING Or THE FIRST SCHOOL TERM NEXT YEAR WIIL NOT
BE ABLE TO OPEN, IF Th. -UNDS HAD BEEN SPENT, UNEMPLOYMENT
IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY IN UL-LL AND IN THE DIFV7CULI
MONTHS AHEAD WOULD HAVE BEEN CONSIDERABLY LESS, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR AUSTRALIAN HARDCOURT TENNIS CHAMPIONSHIPS
AT GYMPIE
NOVEMBER 1974
1. THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN MANY INITIATIVES IN TOURISM
AND RECREATION TO WIDEN AUSTRALIANS' LEISURE OPPORTUNITIES.
IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS 120 GRANTS TOTALLING $ 4 MILLION
HAVE BEEN MADE TO SPORTING AND RECREATION PROJECTS IN ALL
STATES. QUEENSLAND CITIES AND TOWNS HAVE RECEIVED
$ 536,200. HERE IN GYMPIE WE ARE SPENDING $ 23,000 ON A
SPORTS RESERVE,
2. TENNIS HAS HAD A REMARKABLE RESURGENCE OF POPULARITY IN
RECENT YEARS. THIS IS LARGELY DUE TO SKILLED PROMOTION
AND THE GREAT FREQUENCY OF OPEN TOURNAMENTS IN WHICH THE
WORLD'I S BEST PLAYERS COMPETE. OLD-FASHIONED DISTINCTIONS
BETWEEN AMATEUR AND PROFESSIONAL PLAYERS HAVE BEEN
REMOVED, MAKING THE GAME MORE EXCITING, MORE COMPETITIVE
AND MORE SPECTACULAR,
3. AUSTRALIA HAS ALWAYS BEEN ONE OF THE WORLD'S TOP TENNIS
NATIONS. WE WANT OUR YOUNGER PLAYERS TO DEVELOP THEIR
SKILLS AND ENJOY THE GAME IN THE BEST POSSIBLE CONDITIONS.
BY GIVING PEOPLE MORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR SPORT WE HOPE TO
ENCOURAGE HIGHER STANDARDS OF PLAY AND BUILD A HEALTHIER
NATION. 



NOTI. S H1OR 1ilLI-PRIME MINISIER
/ MAkYbUkUUGI, LD.
3 NUVLIIULI 19i71
J WL IIAVL AI'PRUVLJD rIL FIRST DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY
AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS,
FOR THE FIRST TIME AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS READY TO
IIELP LOCAL COUNCILS DELVELOP THEIR SERVICES AND AMENITIES
FOR THE PEOPLE. MARYBOROUGH CITYCUNIL IS RECEIVING
$ 130,000 ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE GRANTS COMMIIDN.,
LOCAL COUNCILS THROUGHOUT QUEENSLAND ARE RECEIVING
MILLION. THESE GRANTS ARE GIVEN WITHOUT INTEREST;
THEY NEED NOT BE REPAID. THERE ARE NOi STRINGS ATTACHED,
THEY CAN BE SPENT BY THE LOCAL COUNCILS AS THEY SEE. FIT.
THEY ARE MADE ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF AN EXPERT INDEPENDENT
BODY. THEY INVOLVE NO POLITICAL PATRONAGE OR FAVOURITISM,
THE DJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS LAWAYS RESISTED
ATTEMPTS TO INVOLVE THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN THE WELFARE
OF LOCAL COUNCILS AND REGIONS. IF THEIR EFFORTS HAD BEEN
SUCCESSFUL MARYBOROUGH TODAY WOULD BE $ 130,000 WORSE OFF
AND COUNCIL RATESWULD BE MUCH MORE LIKELY TO RISE
FURTHER.
2. UNDER LABOR'S PROPOSALS A HIGH-GRADE ALL-WEATHER HIGHWAY
WILL LINK MARYBOROUGH WITH BRISBANE AND EVENTUALLY WITH
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. DESPITE OPPOSITION OBSTRUCTION
WE HAVE PASSED THE NECESSARY LEGISLATION TO PROVIDE
$ i1,126 MILLION FOR OUR NATIONAL ROADS PROGRAM OVER THE NEXT
THREE YEARS, a / 2 
WI-. ARE THE F-IRST NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 10 UNDERTAKE THIS
L5. LN11AL I'PUGRAM, NO SIATI GOVERNMLNI HAS HAD THE
1; iiU Jl! CI. i I 0 I1 AI. ONI NO I'LIVlOUS Fl.) ERAL GOVERNMINT
CARLD ENOUGH TO DO IT EVEN THOUGH THEY HAD THE
NECESSARY CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS.
WE WANT TO SEE-MARYBOROUGH-PROPERLY SERVED BY SHIPS OF
IlE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN, ALONE
AMONG THE PREMIERS HAS PREVENTED A. NL. SHIPS OPERATING
BETWEEN PORTS WITHIN HIS OWN STATE. QUEENSLAND CITIES
HAVE BEEN DENIED AN ESSENTIAL SHIPPING SERVICE SOLELY
BECAUSE OF THE OBSTINACY AND PREJUDICE OF THE OUTGOING
PREMIER. MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN'S ATTITUDE IS NOT SHARED
BY THE AUTHORITIES IN OTHER COASTAL PORTS. MR. BORZI,
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE CAIRNS HARBOUR BOARD, AND A FORMER
STATE CANDIDATE OF THE NATIONAL PARTY, SAID IN HIS
1973-74 ANNUAL REPORT:
" THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL LINE'S WEEKLY CARGO
SERVICES TO AND FROM THE SOUTH BROUGHT INCREASED
TRADE AND REVENUE. UNFORTUNATELY THE BOARD'S
SUPPORT OF MOVES TO HAVE A. N. L. GRANTED THE
PRIVILEGE OF CONDUCTING AN INTRA-STATE CARGO
SERVICE HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL TO DATE." 
-3-
Ll, THE BJELKE-PETERSEN GOVERNMENT HAS REFUSED TO
CO-OPERATE IN OUR EFFORTS TO MAINTAIN THE WALKERS LTD.
SHIPYARD IN MARYBOROUGH, WHEN WALKERS ANNOUNCED THEIR
DECISION TO CEASE SHIPBUILDING WE IMMEDIATELY SOUGHT
WAYS OF KEEPING THE INDUSTRY GOING. ON 24 APRIL I
INVITED WALKERS LTD. AND THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT TO
JOIN WITH US ON A 50-50 BASIS TO ESTABLISH A NEW SHIPBUILDING
AND ENGINEERING WORKS AT MARYBOROUGH AND
REHABILITATE WALKER'S EXISTING FACILITIES WHILE THE NEW
YARD WAS BEING BUILT. MY COLLEAGUE, CHARLIE JONES, THE
MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT, VISITED MARYBOROUGH TO SEEK WAYS
OF KEEPING THE YARD OPEN. HE OFFERED TO GO IT ALONE
IF THE OTHER PARTIES REFUSED TO CO-OPERATE. WALKERS
REFUSED THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OFFER TO LEASE THE
YARD AS A GOING CONCERN. THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
REJECTED OUR OFFER TO TAKE A HALF SHARE IN REHABILITATING
THE YARD AND DEVELOPING A NEW SHIPBUILDING AND ENGINEERING
WORKS. THE WORKFORCE HAS NOW DISPERSED AND MUCH OF THE
EQUIPMENT HAS BEEN SOLD. MARYBOROUGH HAS : BEEN DEPRIVED
OF THIS THRIVING AND IMPORTANT INDUSTRY LARGELY BECAUSE OF
THE ATTITUDE OF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. ,/ 4 
LIINDUSTRIAL
ACTIVITY IN MARYBOROUGH IS AT A LOW EBB
BECAUSE THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS FAILED TO ATTRACT
INIIW IIJ: i) UI RI I U 1111 l iN, MAIRY'( ROUGIRI ( S INPUSTRIAL
rITATEi IS VIiTAU'AI. LY UNUSEI. D YE. T THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
REJECTS OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WHICH WOULD STIMULATE EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS CONFIDENCE.
lMUNCY I-ROVIDI) ED BY THE / AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS SPENT
MORE SLOWLY AND SPARINGLY BY QUEENSLAND THAN BY ANY OTHER
STATE. So FAR THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS SPENT ONLY
18% OF THE MONEY AVAILABLE IN CAPITAL GRANTS FOR EDUCATION
IN 1974 AND 1975. IT IS BUILDING FEWER HOUSING COMMISSION
HOMES THAN ANY OTHER STATE DESPITE OUR OFFER OF A VIRTUAL
BLANK CHEQUE FOR WELFARE HOUSING CONSTRUCTION, ONLY Ai
STATE LABOR GOVERNMENT LED BY PERC TUCKER AND WORKING IN
CO-OPERATION WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN DEVELOP
" IARYBOROUGH'S FULL POTENTIAL AS AN INDUSTRIAL CITY. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OPENING OF THE ARTHUR DIBDIN COMPLEX
BRISBANE CRICKET GROUND 1 DECEMBER 1974
1. Whenever I perform functions of this kind a few
unkind people accuse me of grandstanding. No one can say I
have neglected sport during my visits to Queensland. Only
yesterday I was at the Australian hardcourt tennis championships
in Gympie. Two weeks ago I visited an Australian Rules Club
in Brisbane. This is one of the biggest crowds I have drawn
during my election campaign. Of course it's a completely nonpolitical
occasion. If it was as lively as some of the meetings
I've addressed, your Premier would be declaring a State of
Emergency. 2. I was delighted to accept the invitation from Clem
Jones. He has revealed some unusual talents lately. Last May
I asked him to run for the Federal Parliament but the people
of Brisbane preferred him to play on his home ground. I always
accept the umpire's decision.
3. Unfortunately I don't get to cricket matches as
often as I should. My distinguished predecessor Sir Robert
Menzies was a great lover of the game. I don't know whether he
ever actually played cricket, but he used to watch it at
Lords whenever he went to London, which was quite often.
He had a longer innings in politics than anyone, so perhaps
there is a lesson somewhere. A Prime Minister should either
follow cricket or go overseas. If he does both it is very hard
to get him out.
4. This ground was the scene of a test match that has
come to be known as the greatest game of cricket ever played.
It was the tied test between Australia and the West Indies in
1960. I wish we had such close results in Queensland elections.
At all events, there is not a cricketer or a lover of the game
in the world who has not heard of the Brisbane Cricket Ground.
Such a ground deserves the very best facilities for players and
spectators. You are getting such facilities in this Arthur Dibdin
complex. They will be a lot better than those at many other
leading grounds in Australia, including the S. C. G. where conditions
are still appalling. My Government has done a lot for sport. We are the
first Federal Government to assume a responsibility in this area
and make direct and regular grants to sporting bodies. We
have given more than $ 500,000 in Queensland for sporting projects.
We have at last dragged sport into politics, or politics into
sport, and I am proud that we have.
6. Brisbane City Council is campaigning strongly to make
Brisbane the venue of the 1982 Commonwealth Games. That will be
decided at Monreal in 1976. Brisbane is already planning the
facilities which could allow it to stage the Games. Sites have
been chosen and work has started * on the athletics complex. I am
glad to announce that the Australian Government through the
Department of Tourism and Recreation, will contribute $ 250,000 to
the cost of the running track. That is in addition to the
$ 500,000 we have given.
7. I hav e pleasure in declaring open the Arthur Dibdin
complex at the Brisbane Cricket Ground. 



OIJlL~ TSLJ\ NID CAIiPAI Gil1
YL Ak S A( JO AOMrl, u " NAsL-Wi AN S 1L iE A
l TWOYC -ARkS AGO, WI S i-RAL. A'W",
Lf' 2/ WTDoNl A GRE-AT1 NEWV COUR31E OF RIEF-CR0 ANID PIHI ICFIVA
IHAS O-%) rlU GH-TII CER LIVING STANDAR\ DS AND WI DER OPPUR U NI TIES
FOR OUP' PEOPLL, FOR -1110 YEARS, OUEENSLNANRS HAVE J3BJF 1TED
FRoMN GUl R PROGRAlM;! lS FOR W!** iriiEP EDUCATI01N, i'ETTER ROA. 1S " ND
HE1-ALTH SERYIIC-S, 1E4TER CiTIES AVID 13ETT l* ER CAR'E OF TI-II.
LHV 1 R ONIN E NT AT T1E S AM F T I il E QUEENSLAND ER S HAVE I'E1FJ'l ISIISSIIJ
OUT ON rill FULL FRU ITS 01 LABOR ' S POLICIES, THEY HAVE ' 3EEN
DL'PR IVED OF ADVANTAGES WHI ICH ALL OTHER AUSTRALIAIlS: HAVil
RliCE: V\ E D Thi-EY HAVE BELiI SUBJECTED TO AN ) VVNCESS'CANT
B" k\ l'iR E OF MI SRIPRESENTAT I ON ABOUT MY GOVERNIElNT AiDJ uITS
[' OL IC IES I CAnEVH,' E RE To SET TIHE RECORD STRAIGHT. I
BI. 1 EVE I HAVE SUCCEEDED. I HAVF ASKED QUEENSLANDERS -T
FACE THE FACTS ABOUT THE I3JELKE--ET'ERSEI\ N GOVERNMENT AND)
DC ID17 WHETHER TIHEY CAN FFORD TO WAISTE ANOTHER TIN1E I'EY ARS
FALLING BEHIND THE NST OF ALI sTR . LiA.
T JEE GOVERNMENT IS GUI LTY ON
FOUR COUNTS, FIRST, BY FrI! G TO CO-OPERATE WITIH OUR INiTI A'ITV E3
IT HAS HELD BACK TFHE DEVELOPPM1EINr OF THh STATE A1ND DIEPRIVED
QUEE: NSLANDERS AN'D THEIR FAMILIES OF: $ v5U MILLION IN FUNDS FOR
ESSE7NTIAL PROJECTS. II 
-2-
FOR REASONS OF SHEER DOGMA AND IDEOLOGY, IT HAS REJECTED
OUR OFFER TO MAKE TOWNSVILLEI A BIGGER AND MORE PROSPEROUS
C I'Y. IT HAS RE JFCIED OUR OFFORF F FEDERAL FUNDS TO
STABILISE LAND PRICES FOR THE HOME BUYER WE HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO CO-OPERATE WITH EVERY LIBERAL PREMIER IN SIMILAR
PL\ NS IN OTIHER STATES, ONLY MR, BJELKE--PETERSENI, BLINDED
BY HIS OBSESSIONS, BL. INKER ED BY HIS PATHOLOGICAL HATRED OF
AN ELECTED LABOR GOVERNMENT, REFUSES TO PLAY BALL.
SECONDLY, THE QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT HAS
REFUSED TO MAKE PROPER USE OF THE FUNDS WE HAVE MADE
AVAILABLE FOR EDUCATION, HOUSING AND OTHER PRUPOSES.
QUEENSLAND HAS BEEN DRAGGING THE CHAIN WHILE EVERY OTHER
STATE HAS MOVED AHEAD. IN OUR LAST BUDGET WE GAVE THE
STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF
WELFARE HOUSING. YET QUEENSLAND IS BUILDING FEWER HOUSING
COMMISSION HOMES THAN ANY OIHER STATE. THEY ARE BUILDING
FEWER THAN THE LAST QUEENSLAND LABOR GOVERNMENT IN ITS LAST
YEAR OF OFFICE IN 1956-57. ' WE HAVE GIVEN RECORD AMOUNTS
FOR EDUCATION. YET QUEENSLAND HAS SPENT ONLY 18% OF THE
CAPITAL FUNDS WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE FOR EDUCATION IN
1973 AND .197-1.
THI-RDLY, THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT HAS WANTONLY
OBSTRUCTED OUR EFFORTS TO DEAL WITH TIE GREAT ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS FACING AUSTRALIA AND ALL OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES.
PRICES IN QUEENSLAND HAVE RISEN FASTER IN THE LAST TWELVE
MONTHS THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN AUSTRALIA. ,/ 3 
I I I I I I, I yl.' W I I I I 1( 1 -A1 Il I ' l HA N IN H
OilA IIl l. N I.: lEHN! IJULNWINS MUST ASK * FITEMSELVES WHIY THIS
I S LAST YLCAR MR13 [ TE S NS) R11-UE TO JOIN 1' i II AN)
L ' I UI PIJ[ H-LR UR S AT A IN NE / 01ISC LI SS THE WS-1 OF POWFPEHS
( Vi 1, l ICLOS III-. CAM PA NIG ED,: A ) G AINST OUR El-FORTS TO' [-CUIkE
TI IL * S! POWS [ WONTFHORil AUSTALAI H GOV ERNIN'iE. HE RLvu SES
1o UJ' S III EUCOUBTEDU Pow0i'ovu S i-ij s GCy ER NIMIETN IH AS TO CO NTROL
1R 1 SWIEN E NEC ESSSARY. IHREE FUSES TO MAKE USE 0F1: UND S
IFRION IY GOVE. R ENT WHICH WOULD GIVE A BOOJST.-TO MANY
01JLEFPSLAND I NDUSTRIES AND CREAT'E lORE JOBS.
FournrIiLY, MR BJELKPETERSEN INSULTS THE
ITi'LL-IGENCE OF THE OUEENSLAND PEOPLE DY' IjS 013SESSON1
hI N1 ISSUES THAT ARE AT 13EST TRIVIAL AN]) AT WORST FIGMENTS
OF IS OWN r: EVERED IIIAGINATIONO. HE RAVES AEOUT CEIiTRA.. ISM,
FIE RANTS ABOUT STATE RIGI-ITS. HE SEETHES ABOUT SOCIALISM,
HE IS MAUDLIN ABOUT THE MONARCHY. HE IS PREOCCUPIED WITI-I
THE Pn iVY COUNCIL, IT IS A PITY HLj'DOES NOT BRING His
UNDOUB'TED ENERG IES TO BEAR ON THE REAL. NEEDS AND CONICERNS
OF THE PEOPLE THE DOIIN--TO-EAR* ITH ISSUES OF HOUSING, IH EALTH,
W/\ 0LS EDUCATION, ROADS THE TRUE ISSUES IN THIS ELECTION
WH, 1-1ICH PENC lUCKER AND T-IE LABOR TEAM HAVE I-ROUGHT CONSTANTLY
BEFORE1 TE PEOPLE. HE HAS REFUSE) TO TALKHIE AS REFUSED
TO LISTEN, HE HAS REFUSED EVEN 1O ANSWER LETTERS, i i 
IY7 LASi 1N OF FIs iC. E -ri L F Li-ji-RAL LA~ BOR
GuNy .1.3 N HA/ S D0111-Gl-'-Ari v1iiIu : ol THiIS ST ATE,. WE HAVE
VRIIL A I. Y( kNIN'l ( Aj IN OUR F INANC IAL PAYMENT'S. OUR~
I IC I 1 2 1IA V I fH.: tL iTIDF Pl 11 JR 1-; T 00U E 1I$ SLA ND Fk OM I TS
COAL . WLE HAVE OEPL1,111 UP NEW l'IARI( L'I'S FOR
( JII. LNS.. H) SULGAR, 14FE HAVIV EMBARKIED UN4 OUR? PLANS ORA
HAT IONAL H1-1 IWAY SYSTEM L. INK ING AL-L THE M'AJ OR C IT IES AS
FAR AS CAIRNS WITH SYD HEY AND MELBOURNE. WE ARE ESTAB. L. ISI-IING
A P-L-AGUE LOCUST C01IAH) 11SSION WHOSE TASK WILL BE rO ELIM11NATE
THiIS SCOURGE ONCE AN4D FOR ALL-1 IN OUR FLOOD RELIEF
PROGR/ TIS WE HAVE MADE THE LARGEST OUTLAYS EVER GRANTED I-OR
THIlEk FLI EU OF A NATURAL. D I SASTER FOR THE F IRST TIME wE ARE
iAlI2NG DIRECTc-F-EDE. RAL GRANTS -1O LOCAL GOVERN MENT BODIES
NEAL~ Y $ 9 MI1LLI ON TO( QUEENSL1AIID ALONE. WE ARE SPEND ING
$ 211 MI LL ION ON BEEF ROAD) S I N THE NIXT THREE YEARS. WE AR E
PROTECTING niL-Gu-' AT BA\ RRIFER REEF FROM OIL DRILLING. WE
ARE[-UPGRAD. INl-, G YOUR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND ATTACKING
' IC SHORTCOMINGS IN YOUR SCHOOL. S AND HOSPITAL SERVICES.
THE BJELKE-P:-ETLRJsLN GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN KEPT IN
OFF ICE BY A FLAGRANT ELECTORAL GERRYI" LANDER WHICH U ISCRI1111 ATES
AS MUCH AGAI NST PROV INCIlAL C IT IES SUCH As Towtjsv ILLE AND
1,1OUNT ISA AS IT DOES AGAINFST BR ISBANE. I N MANY STATE
E. LECTORATES * IN QUEENSLANID THERE AVR. E TWICE AS MANY VOTERS AS
THERE ARE iN OTHER ELECTORATES.. SOME I: EOPLE's VOTES ARE WiORTH
HALF AS MUCH AS OTHER PEOPLE'IS VOTES. ALL AUSTRA\ LIANS, ALL
D01OCIRATS, WILL CONDEMN11 THIS SYSTEM FOR ITS AFFRONT TO NATURAL
JUSTICE AN4D TIl-lE VIOLENCE-IT D. OES TO OUR COUNTRY'IS REPUTATION,
QUEENSLANDERS MUST ASK THEMSELVES WHETHER THEY CAN ALLOW SUCH
A SYSTEM TO0 DEPRIVE THEM OF REAL MATER IAL GAINS AND SET BACK THE
PROGRESSAND DEVELOPMEN'T OF THEIR STATE$ 
V
I DO NOT CLAIM THAT WE HAVE TlHE ANSWERS TO EVERY
PROBLEM. I DO CLAIM THAT WE HAVE MORE CHANCE OF SOLVING
PROBLEMS IF WE WORK TOGETHER, IF WE PREFER CO-OPERATION TO
CONFLICT. QUEENSLAND CANNOT LIVE IN ISOLATION, SIHE CANNOT
PROSPER IF SHE REtMAINS AT ODDS WITH THE REST OF A USRALIA.
SHE CANNOT FULFIL HER UNDOLUBTFD DESTINY HER LIMITLESS
PROMISE. iF SHE REMAINS THE ODD STATE OUT
1 NOVEMBER 1974 



SKL( H AT OUR LADY OF NF RCY (' 01. I l
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. E. G. WHITLAM, MY.,
ON DECEMBER i, 1974.
YOUR EMINENCE, SISTER PAULINE, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS,
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN AND, ESPECIALLY, GIRLS.
YOU WILL PROBABLY KNOW THAT I HAVE RETURNED
FROM CAMPAIGNING IN QUEENSLAND IN ORDER TO KEEP A LONG
STANDING PROMISE TO MY COLLEAGUE RAY THORBURN, M. P. FOR
COOK, IT WAS VERY TEMPTING TO STAY NQRTH OF THE
BRISBANE LINE, ESPECIALLY AS TODAY IS THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE WORLD'S FIsrT LABOR GOVERNMENT, A QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT, HELD UNDER A TREE AT BARCALDINE ON THE TROPIC
OF CAPRICORN. I AM NOTHING IF NOT ALIVE TO THE LURE OF
ANNIVERSARIES. THEY PROVIDE SPLENDID OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SAYING ALL THOSE THINGS THERE IS NORMALLY LITTLE CALL FOR
SAYING. TODAY, OF COURSE, IS A VERY SPECIAL DAY FOR
OUR LADY OF MERCY COLLEGE. I AM SURE IT WILL ENTER YOUR
ANNALS AS A SPECIAL ANNIVERSARY ALONG WITH MORE SANCTIFIED
FEAST DAYS. AT THE SAME TIME, TODAY IS A VERY SPECIAL
DAY FOR ME. 
IT IS TWO YEARS TODAY SINCE MY LAST DAY AS
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT.
IT IS TWO YEARS TOMORROW SINCE THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
RETURNED MY PARTY To GOVERNMENT THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN
LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 23 YEARS. IN THE LAST FEW DAYS
I HAVE INDULGED IN SOME NOSTALGIA IN VARIOUS RADIO AND
TELEVISION INTERVIEWS. IN EACH INTERVIEW AND I
SHOULD NOTE IN PARTICULAR AT THIS GATHERING THE ONEI
GAVE To 2SMl ST MARY'S IN SYDNEY I WAS ASKED WHAT
ICONSIDERED OUR GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT IN THOSE TWO
SHORT BUT VERY FULL YEARS. IN EACH ANSWER I REPLIED
UNHESITATINGLY: EDUCATION. IHAD BECOME THE MEMBER OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES FOR THIS DISTRICT 25 YEARS
AGO. IN MY FIRST YEAR IN PARLIAMENT I TWICE URGED THAT
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAVE TO TAKE THE SAME
DEGREE OI INTEREST IN SCHOOL EDUCATION AS IT WAS ALREADY
TAKING IN UNIVERSITY EDUCATION.
SO IT IS MOST APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD OPT OUT
OF A POLITICAL CAMPAIGN TO COME HERE TODAY IN ORDER TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE OPENING AND DEDICATION OF YOUR NEW
LIBRARY BLOCK. THIS IS A TANGIBLE ILLUSTRATION OF MY
BELIEF THAT LABOR'IS OUTSTANDING MONUMENT WILL PROVE TO BE
WHAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO, WHAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED, IN THE
EDUCATIONAL FIELD. . t3/, 
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN ANY QUALIFICATION ABOUT
my GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION.
IN MY POLICY SPEECH IN NOVEMBER 1972. JUST
TWO YEARS AGO, I PROMISED THAT EDUCATION WOULD B E THE
MOST RAPIDLY GROWING SECTOR OF PUBLIC SPENDING UNDER A
LABOR GOVERNMENT. I SAID THEN: " EDUCATION SHOULD
BE THE GREAT INSTRUMENT FOR THE PROMOTION OF EQUALITY."
WE SAW EDUCATION AS THE PRIMARY INSTRUME NT FOR IMPROVING
THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR OUR PEOPLE AND PROMOTING EQUALITY
OF OPPORTUNITY FOR OUR CHILDREN. WE PROPOSED A NEW
CHARTER FOR THE CHILDREN OF AUSTRALIA.
WITHIN A YEAR THAT CHARTER HAD BEEN PROCLAIMED,
ITS MAI-N PROMISES ENACTED, ITS ESSENTIAL FUNDS PROVIDED.-
ITS INSTITUTIONAL FORMS ESTABLISHED. ITS GREAT AND
LASTING BENEFITS CONTINUE TO FLOW TO THE CHILDREN OF
AUSTRALIA, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA.
MY OWN EXTENSIVE TRAVELLING THROUGH THE LENGTH
AND BREADTH OF QUEENSLAND IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS HAS
CONFIRMED ME IN MY RESOLUTION THAT CHILDREN EVERYWHAERE
IN AUSTRALIA ARE ENTITLED TO, AND SHOULD RECEIVE, AS
EXCELLENT AN EDUCATION AS CHILDREN AN{ YWHERE IN AUSTRALIA. 
IF YOU GO TO SCHOOL AT BURRANEER YOU SHOULD HAVE THE
SAME GOOD OPPORTUNITIES AS IF YOU GO TO SCHOOL IN
BRISBANE OR AT BURNIE IN TASMANIA OR AT BRIDGETOWN IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA. IF PARENTS'ARE OBLIGED TO MOVE
INTERSTATE TO PURSUE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, THEY
SHOULD NOT HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT THE QUALITY OF
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY AVAILABLE FOR THEIR SCHOOL
CHILDREN, IAM QUITE SURE THAT THE GREAT CATHOLIC
TEACHING ORDERS WHICH HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO PROMOTE
SCHOOLING IN THIS GREAT BUT STILL YOUNG COUNTRY OF OURS
WOULD HAVE NO QUARREL WITH my GOVERNMENT' S DESIRE. TO
PROMOTE THE INTERESTS OF THE CHILD IN RELATION TO THE
TOTAL COMMUNITY. THE DEDICATED NUNS AND BROTHERS WHO
LEFT ALL THAT WAS DEAR TO THEM IN IRELAND IN ORDER TO'
UNDERTAKE THE LONG INHOSPITABLE VOYAGE TO SMALL PARISH
SCHOOLS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA WERE VERY'REAL EXPONENTS
OF THE DESIRE TO GIVE PEOPLE AND ESPECIALLY THE
CHILDREN IN THEI" R CARE A PROPER CHANCE IN LIFE.
.85/. 9 
ONLY TWO WEEKS AGO I HAD THE VERY REAL PRIVILEGE
OF ATTENDING A DINNER IN MELBOURNE IN HONOUR OF THAT CITY' S
NEW CATHOLIC ARCHBISHOP. DR FRANK LITTLE. AN IMPRESSIVE
AND CHARMING MAN, ARCHBISHOP LITTLE WAS, AMONGST OTHER
MORE OBVIOUSLY EXALTED TITLES, PARISH PRIEST OF ST MONICA'S
IN THE MELBOURNE SUBURB OF MOONEE PONDS WHEN HE WAS
APPOINTED ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE. HE HAD ATTENDED
ST MONICA'S SCHOOL AS A CHILD IN THAT PARISH. LIKE SO
MANY OF THE HIERARCHY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA.-
HE HAS A VERY REAL APPRECIATION OF THE PROBLEMS WHICH HAVE
FACED THE PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS IN THE PAST AND OF THEIR
VERY REAL NEEDS IN TRYING TO COPE WITH THE DEMANDS PLACED
ON THEM BY EXPANDING SCHOOL POPULATIONS AT A TIME* OF
INCREASING SOPHISTICATION IN THE TECHNOLOGY OF EDUCATION.
THE SAME PROBLEMS ARE AFFLICTING CATHOLIC
SECONDARY SCHOOLS. OUR LAD OF MERCY COLLEGE HAS A TOTAL
ENROLMENT OF 496 GIRLS, ENCOMPASSING THE YEARS FROM FORM I
TO SCHOOL CERTIFICATE. I UNDERSTAND THAT WHAT WOULD BE
AND 6TH FORMS ARE EFFECTIVELY COMBINED AT DE LA SALLE
AND THIS IS A SENSIBLE WAY OF ACCOMMODATING THE FINAL YEARS
OF SECONDARY EDUCATION. BUT INCREASING COSTS MAKE THE
PROSPECT OF RUNNING A SECONDARY SCHOOL OF ANY SIZE SOMETHING
LESS THAN A SUNDAY-SCHOOL PICNIC. WE RECOGNISE THIS AND
HAVE TAKEN SPECIAL MEASURES TO HELP. 116/ 1 
61
IWAS, THEREFORE, DELIGHTED TO READ
ARCHBISHOP CARROLL'S RECENT REMARKS PAYING TRIBUTE
TO THAT ASPECT OF OUR APPROACH TO EDUCATION. HE
WAS SPEAKING AT THE OPENING OF A NEW SCHOOL LIBRARY
IN MARRICKVILLE, STRANGE HOW ATTRACTIVE LIBRARIES
ARE TO US ALL, AND HOW LOQUACIOUS THEY MAKE ARCHBISHOPS
AND PRIME MINISTERS ALIKE.
ARCHBISHOP CARROLL SAID: " UN DER THE MANY
PRESSURES OF THE POST-WAR YEARS, CATHOLIC SCHOOLS HAVE
BEEN THREATENED WITH WHOLESALE CLOSURE DUE TO MOUNTING
FINANCIAL PROBLEMS.
" HOWEVER, WE ARE BOTH PLEASED AND PROUD TO
RECORD THAT SUCCESSIVE GOVERNMENTS, STATE AND FEDERAL,
HAVE ENABLED NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS TO SURVIVE AND
PROSPER BY MAKING AVAILABLE GRANTS, FIRST FOR RECURRENT
COSTS, THEN FOR CAPITAL, NOW ALSO FOR MANY SPECIAL
PROGRAMS, SUCH A\ S FOR DISADVANTAGED AREAS, FOR TEACHER
DEVELOPMENT, FOR LIBRARIES..
A WEEK BEFORE, THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY REPORTED
ON THE MOST RECENT MEETING OF THE NATIONAL CATHOLIC
EDUCATION COUNCIL i@ 71e 
THE COUNCIL WAS KIND ENOUGH TO ADOPT THE
FOLLOWING RESOLUTIONS:-" THE NCEC ACKNOWLEDGES AND APPRECIATES THE
ACTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN MAKING
SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS IN THE 1974 BUDGET, THEREBY
INCREASING EDUCATIONAL FUNDS FOR 1974 AND 1975 TO
OFFSET THE EFFECTS OF INFLATION ON THE VALUE OF'GRANT S
PREVIOUSLY ANNOUNCED, AND
" THE NCEC IS PLEASED TO SEE THAT THE
AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS COMMISSION' S REPORT TO THE MINISTER
FOR EDUCATION, SUPPLEMENTARY FUNDS FOR PROGRAMS
ADMINISTERED BY THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, WHICH FOLLOWS
LINES RECOMMENDED BY THE NCEC AND OTHER INTERESTED
BODIES, WAS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT."
NATURALLY, I AM DELIGHTED TO LEARN THAT OUR
EDUCATION PROGRAM HAS SUCH RESPONSIBLE ENDORSEMENT
FROM THE NATIONAL CATHOLIC EDUCATION COUNCIL.
BUT I WOULD BE LESS THAN FAIR TO THE COUNCIL
AND THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY IF I DID NOT ALSO REFER TO
ANOTHER COUNCIL RESOLUTION FROM THE SAME CANBERRA
MEETING. 
THE COUNCIL REGRETTED THAT THE AMOUNT
ALLOWABLE IN CALCULATING INCOME FAX AS A DEDUCTION
FROM INCOME FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES WAS " tABRUPTLY
AND SEVERELY DIMINISHED"
THE COUNCIL BELIEVED THAT THIS ACTIONWOULD
HAVE A SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECT ON THE
FINANCIAL CONDITION OF PARENTS WHO MAINTAIN CHILDREN
IN NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS, PARTICULARLY-AT THE
SECONDARY LEVEL. THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY ALSO STATED IN AN EDITORIAL
IN THE SAME ISSUE:
" MR. WHITLAM'S DECISION NOT TO RESTORE THE
STUDENT TAX CONCESSION MAY BE THE MOST DISASTROUS HEHAS
EVER MADE. s
" No MATTER WHAT CLAIMS ARE MADE THAT INDEPENDENT
SCHOOLS NOW RECEIVE ' STATE-AID', THE MERE FACT OF
REDUCING THE TAX DEDUCTION HAS DEPRIVED THOSE SCHOOLS
OF SOME FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND INSTEAD OF BRINGING
THEIR PUPULS TO EQUITY WITH THOSE AT STATE SCHOOLS, IS
TAKING THEM BACK TO OLD TIMES."/ 1 19/, 
9.
TH E EDITORIAL GOES ON TO SAY THAT THE DECISION
IS DISASTROUS TO PARENT TAX-PAYERS AND ItTHAT IT IS
DISASTROUS ON PRINCIPLE BECAUSE IT RESTORES THE OLD
PRACTICE OF DISCRIMINATION IN EDUCATION, TAXATION JUSTICE
AND CITIZENSHIP RIGHTS."
HARSH WORDS INDEED ABOUT AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS DONE MORE THAN* ANY OTHER AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN HISTORY TO DO AWAY WITH DISCRIMINATION IN
ALL -ITS GUISES, TO ADHERE TO THE PRINCIPLE OF TAXATION
JUSTICE AND TO ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO EXERCISE HIS OR
HER RIGHTS AS A PERSON, CITIZEN OR OTHERWISE.
Now, I CAN UNDERSTAND WHY MANY OF YOU ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT my GOVERNMENT'S DECISION THAT THE FIGURE I
SHOULD COME DOWN FROM $ 40OO PER YEAR MAXIMUM DEDUCTION
TO $ 150 A YEAR MAXIMUM DEDUCTION. BUT I REFUTE
ABSOLUTELY THE SUGGESTION OF THE CATHOLIC WEEKLY EDITORIAL
THAT IT REPR" ESENTS A RETURN TO THE BAD OLD DAYS.
NOTHING COULD BE FURTHER FROM THE TRUTH. IWELCOME
THE OPPORTUNITY TO EXPLAIN THAT DECISION TO YOU TODAY. 
TO EXPLAIN PROPERLY, I MUST TAKE YOU BACK
TO THE EARLY YEARS OF THE MENZIES REIGN WHEN THE
DEDUCTION WAS FIRST INTRODUCED. IN 1952/ 53, THE
DEDUCTION WAS $ 100 WHICH WAS A NOT INCONSIDERABLE
AMOUNT OF MONEY THE YEAR THE QUEEN WAS CROWNED, THE
YEAR MENZIES PROCLAIMED HER QUEEN OF AUSTRALI A, THE
YEAR THEY CONQUERED EVEREST. BUT THAT WAS ALSO A
TIME WHEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON EDUCATION
IN THE STATES WAS NON-EXISTENT. IT WAS VERY MUCH
LATER INDEED THAT MENZIES TO HIS ETERNAL CREDIT
FIRST GAVE COMMONWEALTH MONEY, THROUGH GRANTS, TO
THE UNIVERSITIES. IT WAS EVEN BEFORE STATE AID.
THE VERY LEAST THEY COULD DO WAS INSTITUTE A TAXATION
DEDUCTION FOR SCHOOL EXPENDITURE,
IN 1952/ 53 SCHOOLS OTHER THAN THE FEW RICHI
WELL-ENDOWED PRIVATE SCHOOLS, MOST OF THEM NON-CATHOLIC,
WERE REALLY NOT THE KIND OF PLACE WHERE* A THINKING
PARENT OF TODAY WOULD WAN[ HIS OR HER CHILD) REN TO
SPEND WHAT ARE ALWAYS PAINTED AS THE HAPPIEST DAYS OF
OUR LIVES. .11/. 
WE HAD, MOST OF USI GONE TO SCHO OL AND LEFT
SCHOOL WITHOUT MUCH COMPLAINT. WE HAD NOT BEEN LED
TO EXPECT ANYTHING BETTER, SO WE DIDN'IT. IF IT WAS
GOOD ENOUGH FOR OUR PARENTS IT WAS GOOD ENOUGH FOR
US, IF IT WAS GOOD ENOUGH FOR US THERE WAS NO
REASON WHY IT SHOULDN'IT BE GOOD ENOUGH FOR OUR
CHILDREN. SOME PARENTS WERE ABLE TO AFFORD TO PAY
TO MAKE IT BETTER; SOME WERE NOT, AND THAT WAS JUST
BAD LUCK FOR THE CHILDREN.
FORTUNATELY, ALL THAT HAS CHANGED, CHANGED
UTTERLY. AND I AM PROUD INDEED THAT ONE OF THE MAIN
REASONS FOR THAT CHANGE IS THE OVERWHELMING BELIEF OF
my GOVERNMENT THAT IT IS ONLY THROUGH EQUALISING THE
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES OF AIL CHILDREN IN AUSTRALIA
THAT WE CAN FULFIL OUR OBLIGATIONS TO ANY. CHILD IN
AUSTRALIA. IKNOW THIS AUDIENCE TODAY WILL SYMPATHISE
WITH THAT CONTENTION. I K( NOW YOU WILL NOT BEGRUDGE
WHAT WE ARE GI\ VING IN BENEFITS TO CHILDREN LIVING IN
ISOLATED AREAS OF AUSTRALIA, THE QUEENSLAND SITUATION
HAS REMINDED ME VERY FORCIBLY OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT
NEW EDUCATIONAL BENEFIT WE INTRODUCED LAST YEAR. 
12.
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WE SPENT OVER $ 8 MILLION TO HELP
OVER 13.. 000 FAMILIES OR 19,000 INDIVIDUAL CHILDREN
IN ISOLATED AREAS WHO UNTIL NOW HAVE SUFFERED
CONSIDERABLE DEPRIVATION BECAUSE OF THE INADEQUACY
OF FURTHER EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES IN THEIR AREAS.
IKNOW YOU WILL NOT BEGRUDGE WHAT WE ARE DOING AT
LAST TO IMPROVE EDUCATION FOR ABORIGINAL CHILDREN.-
FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN,. FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN, FOR
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN WHER EVER, WHOEVER,. THEY MIGHT
HAPPEN TO BE. AND IN CASE YOU ARE WONDERING,. I AM NOT
REALLY GETTING OFF THE TRACK. THE POINT I AM TRYING
TO MAKE IS THAT MY GOVERNMENT IS DOING FAR MORE FOR
INDIVIDUAL AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLCHILDREN THAN ANYONE
MIGHT HAVE DREAMED OF.
AND THAT'S NOT 1-O MENTION OUR CAPITAL
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM,. OR RECURRENT GRANTS,. OR LIBRARY
AND SCIENCE GRANTS,. ALL OF WHICH ARE AVAILABLE AND
HAVE BEEN TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
WHAT IT ALL ADDS UP TO IS AN ESTIMATED $ 1,535 MILLION
EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT1
THIS YEAR. AN INCREASE OF 344L PER CE 4T ON THE LAST
FULL YEAR OF THE LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENT
WHICH SPENT A THEN RECORD OF $ 346 MILLION ON EDUCATION
IN 1971/ 72, It71I 
13.
DIRECT EXPENDITURE ON NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
HAS RISEN FROM $ 39 MILLION IN 1971/ 72 TO AN ESTIMATED
$ 126 MILLION IN 1974/ 75 A RISE OF 223 PER CENT.
So LET ME RETURN TO MY GOVERNMENT'S
DECISION TO REDUCE THE MAXIMUM TAXATION DEDUCTION FROM
$ 400 PER PUPIL TO $ 150 PER PUPIL, IT WAS A DECISION
THAT WAS NOT TAKEN LIGHTLY NOR WANTONLY, IT WAS A
SOUND ECONOMIC DECISION ALBEIT AN UNPOPULAR ONE. No
GOVERNMENT THAT CUTS CONCESSIONS CAN EXPECT TO BE
CHEERED IN THE STREETS, OR, IN THIS CASE, IN THE CHURCH
SCHOOLS. IT WAS A DECISION TAKEN INLINE WITH MY
GOVERNMENT'S GENERAL POLICY OF CUTTING OUT DISGUISED
SUBSIDIES. WHICH IS WHAT THIS WAS.
IN SIMPLE FACT, TREASURY FIGURES INDICATE
THAT* TAX-PAYERS ON HIGHER INCOMES SAVE MlORE THAN THOSE
ON LOWER INCOMES AS A RESULT OF THE PROGRESSIVE TAX
RATE SCALE. IN 1971/ 72 THE GREAT MAJORITY OF TAX-PAYERS
WHOSE CHILDREN ATTENDED GOVERNMENT AND PAROCHIAL
SHCOOLS DID NOT NORMALLY CLAIM AMOUNTS OF MORE THAN
$ 150 P. A. FOR EACH STUDENT CHILD. .1LI/. I.. 
141
THE AVERAGE DEDUCTION DID NOT REACH $ 150
UNTIL NET INCOME REACHED $ 9,000. IT CANNOT
REASONABLY BE ASSUMED THAT PEOPLE EARNING $ 9,000
IN 1974/ 75 WOULD SPEND MORE ON AVERAGE THAN $ 150
PER CHILD. My GOVERNMENT DECIDED THAT A CUT-OFF
FIGURE OF $ 150 REPRESENTED A REASONABLE-COMPROMISE.
THE STATISTICS DEMONSTRATE THAT THE HIGHER'
A TAX-PAYERS'IS INCOME, THE MORE LIKELY HE IS TO CLAIM
LARGER DEDUCTIONS FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES.
THE PRESENT TAXATION SCALES ENSURE THAT
WHERE TWO TAXPAYERS CLAIM THE SAME DEDUCTION, THE
TAX-PAYER WITH THE HIGHER INCOME GAINS THE GREATER
BENEF-IT. THE SYSTEM PRODUCES THE SITUATION THAT THE
RICHER THE PARENT, THE MORE DOLLARS HE IS LIKELY TO
CLAIM AND THE MOR~ E HE GETS BACK OUT OF EACH DOLLAR
HE CLAIMS. 
iL
I-HIAS NEVER I3LEN LXP" ECTLfD THAT CONCESSIONAL
C( 0V: F LLIL-I id ) 1 URE OF A PERSONAL OR DOMESTIC
NATUJRE. REAL-ISE THAT SOME PEOPLE H1.! E C ( l TO
Yie.~: r THEN AS A RIGHT, BUT THEY ARE NO MiORE THAN
T/ AX CONCE'SSIONS, INUTENDED TO T'AIKE SOME LURDEN FRWi~ l
TAX -PAYlffEf T-lE' ARE NOT IMNiLUTABLE rHOI GM TI EIR
THE 1fE0DrMU C$ L-TDI( Oi( UT O 1iU: UI LL RESULT
A N 1' 0d IN A FUI. L. YEAR OF ' O MMII I NLLVENU'L[-
TliX'T'S NOT REALLY A GRi. AT DEAL. OUT OF OUR' TOTAL
0F. KT 1 3Ur IT DOES MEAIN Ti-AT O iT il I OW HAS EJEFN
r virC fi AC2-i:/ L FUNY' ING -F
L1DUCAIION AT ALL LEVELS. IT IS PART OF THIS YEAR'S
PCCRDil EXPENDITURE OF .$ 1535 MILLION, AND THIS
MILLION WAS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT WHEN WE WERE
DRAWING UP THIS YEAR' S BUDGET, I REMIND YOU AGAIN
THAT MY GOVTRrINEN1' S DIRECT EXPENDITURE ON
Ixi GOVERNrI1ENr SCHOO1-S THIS YEAR WILL BE $ 1.26 MILLION
At-1 INCREASE OF 223 PER CENT ON THAT OF 1971/ 72 WHEN
THE $ 400 DEDUCTION WOTH $ 30 MILLION APPLIED.
I DON'T EXPECT THAT I HAVE CONVERTED YOU,
BUT I HAVE READ YOU A LITANY OF SOME OF OUR
ACI-IIEVEMENTS IN EDUCATION, OF WHICH IAM LINASHAMEDLY
PROUD. 
16.
ISPOKE EARLIER OF INEQUALITIES.
THE KARMEL COMMITTEE REPORT COMMENTED ON
THE INEQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR GIRLS.-tI
AND IN JULY THIS YEAR IT WAS DECIDED TO UNDERTAKE
A SPECIAL STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF SOCIAL CHANGE ON
THE EDUCATIONAL NEEDS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS. THIS I
WIDE RANGING STUDY WILL COVER SUCH AREAS AS
ACHIEVEMENT, VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE, PARENT AND TEACHER
ATTITUDES, TEACHER TRAINING, BEFORE AND AFTER SCHOOLI
CARE, AND ANY OTHER MATTERS AFFECTING THE EDUCATION
OF WOMEN AND GIRLS A FINAL REPORT WILL RECOMMEND
IROGRAM4S AND CHANGES TO CORRECT THE PRESENT IMBALANC'r
WHICH HAS RESTRICTED THE CAREERS AND
TO WOMEN AND GIRLS.
My GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT GIRLS SHOULD II
BE ENCOURAGED TO CONSIDER THE WHOLE RANGE OF OCCUPAT ; IS
N TO THEM. THEY SHOULD BE MAZ-c AWARE OF THlE
POSSIB3ILITIES AND MEANS OF ACHIEVING OL-Cu...
AND NOT MERELY INFORMED OF THE BARRIERS IN THEIR'~.
GROWING FAMILIARITY WITH THE RANGE OF IDEAS
, JND1IN FORMATION AVAILABLE THROUGH YOUR NEW LIBRARY IS
ONCL-DISCOVERING THE POSSIBILITIES OPEN TO YOU.
1. 171. 
171
A RECENT EVALUATION REPORT ON OUR LIBRARIES
PROGRAM SUGGESTED THAT NEW FACILITIES WERE ENCOURAGING
NEW PATTERNS OF TEACHING AND LEARNING. a
THiE REPORT STATED THAT " THESE NEW PATTERNS
INCL. UDE MORE INDIVIDUALISATION OF INSTRUCTION,. MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE LEARNERS TO PARTICIPATE IN THEIR
EDUCATION, TO BE ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT IT AND ' ro BE MORE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR OWN PROGRESS."
THAT AUGURS WEL. L FOR THIS NEW LIBRARY AND
THE CONTRIBUTION IT CAN MAKE TO THE LIFE OF THE
SCHOOL. IAM QUITE SURE THAT ALL OF YOU -SIST
PALINE, STAFF AND GIRLS W'IL L ENJOY DISCOVERING
AND REAPING THE BENEFITS OFTHIS NEW LEARNING CENTRE
WITHIN OUR LDY OF MIERCY COLLEGE. I
( Rj'a) 



NOTEI; S FR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR DIAMOND VALLEY A. LP, IARBECIF
2 D) ECEMBiER 19741
J. I'/ IIAf BETTlIE PLACE TO CILLHIRATE LABHOR'S (&gt; REAT VICTORY TWO
YEARS AGO THAN HElIRE IN DIAMOND VALLE: Y, ONIL OF TillE ECI IVE
SEATS IN OUR DRIVL [ OR I'UowIR. LABOR WOULD STILL HAVE WON IN
1972 WITHOUT ITS GAINS IN DIAMOND VALLEY, HOLT, CASEY AND
LATROBE. IT WOULD STILL HAVE WON IN 19/ L WITHOUT ITS EXTRA
GAINS IN ISAACS AND HENTY. THOSE SEATS, HOWEVER, PROVIDED
THE SUBSTANCE OF OUR MAJORITY, IN 1972 AND AGAIN IN 1974,
ITIS A PLEASANT IRONY THAT WE HAVE TWICE SECURED OUR NATIONAL
MAJORITY THROUGH OUR VOTES IN THE VERY STATE THAT DENIED US
GOVERNMENT FOR SO LONG. IN OUR VICTORY IN 1972 A GENERATION
OF BITTERNESS AND DIVISION WAS PUT BEHIND US , lA
NEW ERA OF HOPE AND CONFIDENCE FOR OUR PARTY, FOR OUR
COUNTRY, WAS BORN. OUR POPULAR BASE IN THIS CITY, AND THIS
STATE, tS NEVER BEEN STRONGER.
2. I MUST SAY THAT I WOULD RATHER BE IN DIA. OND VALLEY THAN MR.
SNEDDEN'S VALLEY. BETTER THIS VALLEY THAN DEATH VALLEY,
;' iD THERE IS NOTHING LIKE A BARBECUE TO RALLY OUR SUPPORTERS
THEY MAY NOT WALK OVER HOT COALS BUT AT LEAST THEY CAN
GRILL In-: R STEAKS OVER THEM., I AM GLAD OF MR. SNEDDEN'S
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT THAT THE HOTTER REGIONS OF THE HEREAFTER ARE
RESERVED FOR HIS PARTY. dIHFM lABOR MEN WALK THROUGH THE
VALLEY OF DEATH I HOPE THEY'LL GO UP INSTEAD OF DOWN.
s 
3. ONE OF THE GREAT BLNI-ITS OF uUR SUCCFSS IN THIS iAKl 0;
i. l. OUKINEL IIA') iLI-N III1-ADDI) TII N ( OF MANY Y) IJNG AND TALI. N II I)
NEW MEMBERS TO OUR RANKS;, DAVID McKI'NZlII, TONY . AMB, PIACE
MATHEWS, MAX OLDMLADUW, JOAN CHILD, GARElII CLAYTON THIY
ARE ALL FIRST-RATE MLMBIRk';, IXCELLENT AC( UIJI'IIf I1ONS TO THE
PARTY AND THE PARLIAMENT, THEY HAVE PARTICIPATED IN TIIE
DEBATES AND DECISIONS THAT MADE POSSIBLE LABOR'S GREAT
ACIIIEVEMENIS DURING I l I A'; IT WO YEARS,
II, IHOSE YEARS HAVE BEEN DIFFICULT, AS YOU KNOW. IN THE LAST
12 MONTHS, ESPECIALLY, WE HAVE FACED IMMENSELY
COMPLEX ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. IT HAS BEEN A TEST OF OUR
NERVE, OUR FAITH, OUR INGENUITY, WE HAVE HAD TO CONTEND
WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT THAT
AFFL. ICT EVERY WESTERN COUNTRY. WE HAVE HAD TO FIGHT BOTH
THOSE PROBLEMS AT THE SAME TIME, AND WE ARE CARRYING ON THE
FIGHT WITh E'ERY AVAILABLE WEAPON, EVERY CONSTITUTIONAL
POWER WE POSSESS. IF YOU COMPARE OUR PERFORMANCE WITH
OTHERS AROUND THE '" ORLD I THINK YOU '. ILL Fi. D THAT WE ARE
DOIN. G BETTER THAN PRACTICALLY ANY OTHER COUNTRY IN THE
F ' T AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT AND WE ARE HOLDING 0" OWN IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST INFLATION. HAVE TAKEN ACTION ON r,, iY
FRONTS. W RE READY. TO TAKE FURTHER ACTION WHENEVER IT
IS NEEDED, / 3 
YUJ WOULDN'F BE IILIMAN IF YOU WEl RE NOT õ IHtE' IMES DISPIRITED
AND DISHEARTENED BY THE FRUSTRATIONS OF THE PAST YEAR. I
SYMPATHISE WITH YOU. I SHARE YOUR FEELINGS. YOU COULDN'T
BE HUMAN IF YOU WERE NOT SOMETIMES DISMAYED BY THE BARRAGE
OF PROPAGANDA AGAINST US, BY THE MISREPRESENTATION, BY THE
MALICE, THE OBSTRUCTION OF OUR OPPONENTS, BY THE OMISSIONS
AND DISTORTIONS OF THE MEDIA, BY THE INCESSANT ATTACKS ON
THE GOVERNMENT FROM VESTED INTERESTS WHETHER ITS REG
ANSETT, BJELKE-PETERSEN, THE DOCTORS, THE WEALTHY PRIVATE
SCHOOLS, OR WHOEVER ELSE IT MAY BE WITH A GRUDGE AGAINST
US, THERE MUST BE TIMES WHEN YOU HAVE ASKED YOURSELVES:
ISN'T THERE SOMETHING THE GOVERNMENT HAS DONE TO BE PROUD
OF? ISN'T THERE SOMETHING THAT WILL GIVE THE LIE TO THESE
AYTTACKS? THE TRUTH IS THAT WE HAVE A GREAT STORY TO TELL,
A FI'F RECORD TO OUR CREDIT. I SHALL GIVE YOU SOME
DETAILS f-IT SHORTLY. BUT THERE IS ONE FACT I ASK YOU
TO REMEMBER: FOR ALL THE MOANINq AND GROANING, THE
DOOM-TALK AND GLG,.. M-TALK OF OUR OPPONENS, AU3TRALIAN' 3 ARE
EVERYWHERE BETTER OFF TODAY THAN THEY BEFORE LABOR
C IN. THE REAL PURCHASING POWER OF AVERAGF TEKLY
EARNINGS, ALLOWING FOR INFLATION, INCREASED BY 3 2% ti THE
YEAR TO Jui,. 1973 AND BY A FURTHER 3.9 IN THF YEAR TO
JUNE 1974 THAT'S A -N OF MORE THAN SEVEN PERCENT IN
REAL LIVING STANDARDS UNDER
6. J D) ON'T SUGGEST THAT OJR ACHIEVEMENTS SHOULD BE MEASURED
IN MONETARY GAINS ALONE. INDEED, THE PURPOSE OF THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT, ITS CENTRAL AMBITION, HAS BEEN TO OFFSET
THE IMPORTANCE OF WAGES, OF TAKE-HOME PAY, AS THE SOLE
DETERMINATION OF A FAMILY ' S STANDARD OF LIVING, nUR
POLICIES ARE DESIGNED TO IMPROVE THOSE ESSENTIAL
INGREDIENTS OF A CIVILIZED LIFE THAT ONLY GOVERNMENTS
CAN PROVIDE A DECENr EDUCATION, PROPER IIEALTH CARE, ROADS,
URBAN TRANSPORT, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, CITIES FIT TO
LIVE IN. To NEGLECT THESE THINGS IS TO UNDERMINE'THE IRUE
BASIS OF PROSPERITY, THE CONDITIONS THAT MAKE FOR GENUINE
SOCIAL ORDER, GENUINE SECURITY, AND GENUINE FULFILMENT FOR
EVERY CITIZEN, WHATEVER HIS PRIVATE MEANS, nUR AIM
HAS BEEN TO WIDEN AND EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS
lil EVERY FIELD WHERE GOVERNMENT ACTION PLAYS A PART. So
ALL rHi. YEAR WE HAVE PRESSED AHEAD WITH OUR GREAT PROGRAM
OF SOCIAL REFORM AND INNOVATION, WE HAVE NEVER ABANDOt-
THAT PROGRAM OR WATERED IT DOWN SUIT OUR OPPONENTS, j
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA HAVE TWICE ENDORSED IT, THEY HAVE TWICE
E[ VCTED US TO CARRY IT OUT, WE WILL GO AHEAD WITH IT. IT
WILL , AKE TIME. IT WILL TAKE PATIENCE. AND 1, J THE FACE OF
OBSTRU.-" P TACTICS AND DELAYS IT WILL TAKE DETERMINATION.
BUT WE WILL 6L_ ON WITH THE JOB YOU ELECTED US .0 DOS 
7. 1 HAVE PREPARED A LIST OF SOME OF OUR PRINCIPAL
ACHIEVEMENTS IN 1974. I SHALL READ TO YOU THE HIGHLIGHTS
AS MANY OF THEM AS YOU HAVE TIME TO HEAR. I HAVE BROUGHT
COPIES OF THIS LIST AND YOU ARE WELCOME TO TAKE THEM
AWAY TONIGHT. LATER THIS WEEK I SHALL BE TABLING IN
THE PARLIAMENT AN EVEN LONGER AND MORE COMPREHENSIVE ACCOUNT
OF OUR ACHIEVEMENTS, IT IS ON THIS RECORD THAT WE ASK TO BE
JUDGED. ON THIS RECORD WE ARE PROUD TO BE JUDGED BY
YOU, OUR SUPPORTERS, AND BY FUTURE GENERATIONS, A LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS AN ACTIVE GOVERNMENT OR IT IS NOTHING, A
LABOR GOVERNMENT IS A REFORMING GOVERNMENT OR'. lT IS NOTHING.
8, THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN LABOR NEEDED A GREATER
UNITY, GREATER SOLIDARITY, GREATER EFFORT. THE BITTER
DIVISIONS AND FRUSTRATIONS AMONG OUR OPPONENTS DO NOT ALLOW
US TO iEL. OURGUARD. THE YEAR AHEAD WILL TEST OUR NERVE
AND OUR SPIRIT AS NEVER BEFORE, WE WILL BE VULNERABLE TO
PANIC TALK,. TO SCARE TACTICS, TO TF. HYSTERIA OF OUR
OPPONENTS. WE WILL BE VULNERABLE TC A CERTAIN IMPATIENCE
AND ,. EWILDERMENT AMONG OUR OWN SUPPORTERS. WE WIL. L WIN
THROUuFH IF WE STICK TOGETHER, IN THE SHOf', T TE. Rii ( OU HAVE
A GUARAITL-OF OUR DETERMINATION TO PROTECT THE WEAK, THE
DISADVANTAGED AI'L,_ THE LOWER PAID AGAINST THE EFFECTS OF
TEMPORARY ECONOMIC AND SOCi. HARDSH! P, IN THE LONG TERM
YOU HAVE A GOVERNMENT PLEDGED TO RAISE OUR SOCIAL AND LIVING
STANDARDS, WIDEN THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL OUR PEOPLE, AND
BUILD A PROUD REPUTATION FOR AUSTRALIA AS ONE OF THE MOST
JUST AND ENLIGHTENED SOCIETIES,
h I t 



NOTES FOR THE PRIHE MINISTER
CITIZEN MI1LITARY FORCES ASSOCIATION__ LU'-CII 4I I) LCLMBER, 94
CITIZEN MILITARY FORCES HAVE PLAYED A LONG, HONOURABLE
AND IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIA, WHILE THE 14ATURE
OF THE ROLE OF THE RESERVE FORCES MAY BE SEEN TO alHANGE OVER
THE YEARS, THERE IS NO DOUBTING THE CONTINUING SIGNIFICANCE
OF THESE FORCES. iHE ARMY RESERVE, OR CHF AS IT USED TO BE
KNOWN,, IS A VITAL PART OF AUSTRALIA'S GROUND FORCE CAPABILITY.
IT FORMS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE BASIS OF EXPANSION OF THE
WHOLE ARMY SHOULD THE NEED ARISE.
THE GOVERNMENT' S. APPROACH TO THE NEEDS AND
STRUCTURING OF THE RESERVE IS BASED ON ITS RECOGNITION OF
THE VITAL ROLE WHICH IT PLAYS. WE WERE NOT SATISFIED THAT THE
RESERVE FORCES HAD BEEN PROPERLY TREATED BY PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENTS. THE MORALE OF THE CMF SUFFERED BADLY FROM THE
WAY IT WAS TREATED AS A DUMPING GROUND FOR CONSCRIPTS, OR
A HAVEN FOR MEN WANTING TO AVOID CONSCRIPTION, MEN WHO HAD
JOINED THE CNF AND INDICATED THEIR WILLINGNESS TO SERVE
OVERSEAS IF NECESSARY IN DEFENCE OF THEIR COUNTRY FOUND
THEIR SERVICES WERE NOT SOUGHT. OR WANTED.
My GOVERNMENT ABOLIS HED CONSCRIPTION AND SET
ABOUT MAKING SERVICE IN THE ARMED FORCES MORE ATTRACTIVE
TO VOLUNTEERS. LAST YEAR, AS PART OF ITS EFFORTS TO REVITALISE
DEFENCE, THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED TO HAVE A COMPLETE REVIEW
OF THE ROLE AND FUNCTIONING OF THE RESERVE, THE MINISTER 
-2-
FOR DEFENCE, MR P) ARNARD, COMMISSIONED THE FIRST-EVER
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY INTO THE CMF. THE COMMITTEE WAS LED
BY DR T. B. MILLAR AND ITS REPORT WAS TABLED IN PARLIAMENT
ON APRIL 4 THIS YEAR.
AT THE TIME MR BARNARD TABLED THE REPORT, HE
LEFT NO DOUBT OF THIS GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION TO REVITALISE
THE ARMY RESERVE. HE INDICATED THEN, AND ON SEVERAL OTHER
OCCASIONS SINCE, THAT HE FULLY SUPPORTED THE BROAD
RESTRUCTURING OF THE CMF RECOMMENDED BY THE CMF COMMITTEE
OF INQUIRY. As PART OF THE NORMAL PROCESS OF PROTECTING
NATIONAL SECURITY WE NEED TO MAINTAIN SOME REGULAR FORCES
CAPABLE OF BEING IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE, AND THESE NEED TO
BE BACKED UP BY RESERVE FORCES WHICH CAN BE BROUGHT TO A
STATE OF READINESS IN A REASONABLY SHORT TIME. THE
RESERVES MUST BE INTEGRATED WITH THE REGULARS, WITHOUT
MAJOR RE-ARRANGEMENT AS IN THE PAST. REGULAR AND RESERVE
COMPONENTS ARE TO BE WELDED INTO A " TOTAL FORCE" THE
AUSTRALIAN ARMY. THE ARMY RESERVE, TOGETHER WITH THE
REGULAR ARMY WILL PROVIDE A VIABLE BASE FOR AN EXPANSION OF
THE AUSTRALIAN ARMY SHOULD THIS BE NECESSARY IN THE FUTURE.
WE WILL HAVE A REGULAR COMPONENT ANT) A RESERVE COMPONENT
WORKING TOGETIILPR ON A RASIS AS NTFAR TO EQUALITY AND
PARTNERSHIP AS THEIR RESPECTIVE CIRCUMSTANCES WILL ALLOW. 
-3-
TO GIVE EFFECT TO THI1S POLICY, THE ARMY RESERVE
IS TO BE INTEGRATED INTO THE FUNCTIONAL COMMAND ORGANISATION
OF THE REGULAR ARMY. IN ADDITION, ARMY RESERVE OFFICERS ARE
TO BE APPOINTED As ASSISTANT COMMANDERS To FIELD FORCE
COMMAND, LOGISTICS COMMAND AND TRAINING COMMAND. IN FACT,
THE ASSISTANT COMMANDER TRAINING COMMAND HAS ALREADY ASSUMED
OFFICE. THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO APPROVED THAT RESERVE
SOLDIERS WEAR COMPARABLE UNIFORM WITH THAT WORN By REGULAR
SOLDIERS. IN GENERAL, THE CMF AT PRESENT CAN ONLY BE USED IN
TIME OF WAR OR IN THE EVENT OF A DECLARED DEFENCE EMERGENCY.
MR BARNARD HAS, ON A NUMB ER OF OCCASIONS, STATED WITHOUT
RESERVATION THAT THE BROAD ROLE ENVISAGED FOR THE ARMY
RESERVE, WILL MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR EMPLOYMENT OF THE RESERVE
IN SITUATIONS SHORT OF A DEFENCE EMERGENCY, IN CIVIL
EMERGENCIES OR TO PROVIDE OTHER ASSISTANCE TO CIVIL AUTHORITIES
AND ORGANISATIONS. LEGISLATION MUST BE ENACTED TO GIVE FULL
EFFECT TO THIS ROLE AND THE ARMY AND THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
ARE STILL EXAMINING THE MANY COMPLEX ISSUES INVOLVED IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF LEGISLATION.
WHEN THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE TABLED THE MILLAR
REPORT IN PARLIAMENT HE SUPPORTED THE BROAD RESTRUCTURING
OF THE FORCES WHICH IT PROPOSED. CLEARLY THE GOVERNMENT ' S
INTENTION IS TO ADVANCE THE ARMY RESERVE, AND IT HAS ALREADY
IMPLEMENTED SOME OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE COMMITTEE.
14/ 1 
MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS APPROVED SINCE 14 APRIL
1974 INCLUDE:-THE APPOINTMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL A. C. MURCHISON
AS INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARMY RESERVE ( IN
ADDITION TO HIS APPOINTMENT AS CITIZEN MILITARY
FORCES MEMBER). ON HIS RETIREMENT ON 27 OCTOBER
HE WAS REPLACED BY MAJOR GENERAL J. M. MACDONALD.
THE ARMY RESERVE BRANCH IN ARMY OFFICE HAS BEEN
RAISED AND MAJOR GENERAL B. A. MCDONALD HAS
BEEN APPOINTED AS CHIEF OF THE ARMY RESERVE,
THE RESERVE BRANCH HAS BEEN CHARGED WITH THE
PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY OF REPRESENTING ARMY
RESERVE INTERESTS AND WILL DIRECT ALL ASPECTS OF
THE RE-ORGANISATION AND OVERSEE ITS IMPLEMENTATION.
THE BRANCH HAS A STATUS EQUAL TO ALL OTHER BRANCHES
AT ARMY OFFICE.
RECRUITING ADVERTISEMENTS ARE ALREADY USING THE
NEW TITLE " ARMY RESERVE". THERE IS, OF COURSE,
THE NEED FOR LEGAL CHANGE TO GIVE FULL EFFECT TO
THIS NEW TITLE.
A CHANGE IN THlE CLOTHING ENTITLEMENTS FOR THE
ARMY RESERVE HAS NOW BEEN APPROVED. THIS NOW
PUTS THE ARMY RESERVE ON A COMPARABLE BASIS WITH
THE REGULAR ARMY. 
MR BARNARD REFERRED THE QUESTION OF PAY FOR THE
RESERVES OF ALL THE SERVICES TO THE COMMITTEE OF REFERENCE
FOR DEFENCE FORCE PAY, AN INDEPENDENT BODY UNDER THE
JUDICIAL CHAIRMANSHIP OF MR JUSTICE COLDHAM, A RECOMMENDATION
HAS NOT YET BEEN RECEIVED FROM THE COMMITTEE OF REFERENCE
THOUGH IT IS EXPECTED SHORTLY, HOWEVER, AS A MEANS OF
IMMEDIATELY IMPROVING THE RESERVE CONDITIONS SALARIES WERE
INCREASED BY 12 PER CENT AS FROM 1 JULY 1974,
THE MILLAR REPORT ACKNOWLEDGED THE RECENT WIDENING
OF OPPORTUNITIES FOR WOMEN MEMBERS TO SERVE IN THE RESERVE AND
RECOMMENDED FURTHER RELAXATION OF RESTRICTIONS AS CIRCUMSTANCES
ALLOWED. STEPS HAVE ALREADY BEEN TAKEN BY THE ARMY IN THIS
DIRECTION INCLUDING:-THE RESTRICTION OF ENLISTMENT OF WOMEN WITH
DEPENDENT CHILDREN HAS BEEN REMOVED,
THE RECOMMENDATION THAT AGE LIMITATIONS ON
ENLISTMENTS, DISCHARGE, AND COMMISSIONING
FOR WOMEN SHOULD BE THE SAME AS FOR MEN WILL
BE IMPLEMENTED AS SOON AS CHANGES TO STATUTORY
REGULATIONS CAN BE MADE, FOR INSTANCE, THE
MINIMUM AGE FOR COMMISSIONED RANK WILL BE
18 YEARS ( CURRENTLY IT IS 21 YEARS FOR WOMEN,
18 FOR MEN), 
-6-
APPROVAL HAS BEEN GIVEN FOR WOMEN TO USE
FIREARMS ON A VOLUNTARY BASIS SUBJECT TO THE
APPROVAL OF THEIR HEAD OF CORPS. AN ARMY
TRAINING INSTRUCTION IS CURRENTLY IN PRINT
AUTHORISING THIS MATTER.
EARLY NEXT YEAR WE EXPECT TO MAKE A DECISION ON
THE MILLAR COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PREFERENTIAL
HOUSING LOANS FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMY RESERVE WHO SERVE SIX
YEARS OR MORE. THE GOVERNMENT IS COMMITTED TO THE MAINTENANCE
OF AN ALL VOLUNTEER ARMY. IT RECOGNISES THAT TO BE EFFECTIVE
SUCH A FORCE MUST HAVE HIGH MORALE, HIGH DEGREE OF MOTIVATION
AND SUITABLE CONDITIONS OF SERVICE. IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S
INTENTION TO ACHIEVE THIS BY ALL THE MEANS AT ITS DISPOSAL.
IBELIEVE THAT A GREAT MAJORITY OF EMPLOYERS ARE
PATRIOTIC AND PUBLIC-SPIRITED. I APPEAL TO THEM TO ADOPT
AND PROMULGATE POLICIES WHICH WILL BE HELPFUL TO THE ARMY
RESERVE AND THE NATION. IN PARTICULAR AN EMPLOYEE WILL
REQUIRE HIS EMPLOYER'IS PERMISSION TO ATTEND THE ANNUAL CAMP
WHICH IS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE YEARLY TRAINING CYCLE.
HOPEFULLY, EMPLOYERS WILL WISH TO FOLLOW THE GOVERNMENT'S
POLICY WHICH IS, TO GRANT EMPLOYEES LEAVE WITH PAY TO ATTEND
ANNUAL CAMPS. WE WANT TO SEE A RESERVE BACKED BY THE COMMUNITY
OF WHICH IT IS PART AND WHICH IT IS DESIGNED TO SUPPORT AND
PROTECT. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,.
AT KNOX GRAMMAR SCHOOL SPEECH NIGHT
DECEMBER, 1974 UY
IT IS NOT WITHOUT SIGNIFICANCE AND NOT WITHOUT
A CERTAIN IRONY THAT THE JUBILEE OF KNOX AND THE SECOND
ANNIVERSARY OF THE LABOR GOVERNMENT ARE BEING OBSERVED IN THE
SAME WEEK. I AM PROBABLY THE ONLY PERSON IN AUSTRALIA WHO j
HAS ATTENDED BOTH CELEBRATIONS AND DERIVED KEEN PERSONAL
SATISFACTION FROM EACH. I MUST CONFESS THAT THE ATMOSPHERE
IN DIAMOND VALLEY ON MONDAY NIGHT WAS A TRIFLE MORE RAPTUROUS
THAN IT IS IN WAHROONGA, BUT LET ME NOT BE STINTING IN MY
GRATITUDE'. THERE IS NO OTHER FORUM WHERE I CAN ACHIEVE SO
LARGE AND CIVIL AN AUDIENCE ON THE DEEP NORTH SHORE AS I CAN
AT KNOX ON SPEECH . NIGHT. THIS IS EASILY THE BEST MEETING I
HAVE ADDRESSED IN THE ELECTORATE OF BRADFIELD$
IT IS'A VERY GREAT HONOUR AND A VERY GREAT
PLEASURE TO BE BACK AMONG YOU. NEEDLESS TO SAY, THE SCHOOL
HAS CHANGED A GOOD DEAL SINCE I WAS HERE. THE BUILDINGS
AND GROUNDS'ARE MORE RESPLENDENT THAN EVER. THE UNIFORM I
AM WEARING TONIGHT IS SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT FROM THE ONE I
REMEMBER. 2/ 
KNOX HAS JOINED' THE SELECT BAND OF SCHOOLS WHOSE
SOLD BOYS INCLUDE A PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA. SOME OF
YOU MAY THINK THAT IN AN IDEAL WORLD THAT HONOUR MIGHT HAVE
FALLEN MORE FITTINGLY ON ONE OF THE OTHER OLD BOYS WHO HAVE
MADE THEIR MARK AT KNOX AND THEIR FORTUNES IN POLITICS
IAN SINCLAIR, JOHN FULLER, JiM FORBES. BUT I WAS DETERMINED
THAT NONE OF THEM WOULD BEAT ME TO IT, FOR MANY YEARS I
NURTURED AN OVERWHELMING AMBITION I WAS RESOLVED TO BE
THE FIRST KNOX BOY TO LIVE AT THE LODGE. WHAT BETTER WAY
TO BRING HONOUR TO THE SCHOOL? FIFTY YEARS AGO, , WHEN I CAME
HERE, NO ONE DREAMED I WOULD ONE DAY BE PRIME MINISTER.
IF ANYONE HAD KNOWN I WOULD BE A LABOR PRIME MINISTER THEY
MIGHT NEVER HAD LET ME IN.: LABOR MEN RARELY WENT TO
KNOX THEY. PREFERRED THE SCHOOL. OF HARD KNOX.
I SUPPOSE WHEN I FINALLY MADE IT THERE WERE SOME
MISGIVINGS IN THE A. L. P. AND NOT A FEW MISGIVINGS HERE.
YET LOOKING BACK, THERE HAVE BEEN SOME REMARKABLE PARALLELS
' IN OUR FORTUNES AND ACHIEVEMENTS. KNOX AND THE LABOR
PARTY HAVE BOTH TURNED OUT A FAIR QUOTA OF JUDGES, DIPLOMATS,
AND HIGH GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS EVEN PRIME MINISTERS. WHEN
A VACANCY OCCURRED ON THE HIGH COURT LAST YEAR IT WAS
OBVIOUS TO ME THAT MR. JUSTICE JACOBS HAD EXACTLY THE RIGHT
BACKGROUND. SOME OF MY AMBASSADORIAL APPOINTMENTS ARE QUITE
WELL KNOWN. PERHAPS I CAN CONFIDE TO THIS AUDIENCE THAT MR.
ROB LAURIE, WHO ACCOMPANIED ME HERE TONIGHT, WILL TAKE UP
A POSTING AS HEAD OF ONE OF OUR ASIAN MISSIONS NEXT YEAR. MR.
LAURIE LEFT KNOX IN 1953. MY PRESS SECRETARY LEFT IN 1951,
I 
S T . y
I UNDERSTAND THAT IN THE PAST YEAR KNOX AND THE A, L. P. HAVE
BOTH HAD BUILDING APPEALS, IT WOULD NOT SURPRISE ME IF ONE
OR TWO BUSINESSMEN HAD GIVEN SOMETHING TO BOTH OF US. AND OF
COURSE WE HAVE DONE GREAT THINGS TOGETHER FOR EDUCATION.
EDUCATION HAS BEEN OUR COMMON GOAL THOUGH OPINIONS MAY DIFFER
ABOUT OUR RESPECTIVE ACHIEVEMENTS,
DESPITE MY EARLY SCHOOLING AT KNOX I HAVE NEVER
BEEN A SIMPLE PRESBYTERIAN. THE MOST CELEBRATED
PRESBYTERIAN TO HOLD THIS OFFICE ATTENDED A METHODIST SCHOOL
IN MELBOURNE. IT IS STILL GOING STRONG. I BEGAN MY
EDUCATION AT TWO ANGLICAN SCHOOLS IN SYDNEY. THEY HAVE
BOTH CLOSED DOWN. ONE OF THEM WAS MOWBRAY HOUSE. IN THE
LAST TERM OF 1922, I ATTENDED THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND GIRLS'
GRAMMAR SCHOOL AT CHATSWOOD. IT WAS MY FIRST CONTACT WITH
THE " MONSTROUS REGIMEN OF WOMEN" WHOSE INFLUENCE JOHN KNOX
DEPLORED WITH SUCH VEHEMENCE. I HAVE OFTEN WONDERED HOW
KNOX WOULD HAVE FARED IF HE HAD SET ABOUT REFORMING THE A. L. P.
INSTEAD OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. HE WAS'A RATHER
SUBVERSIVE CHARACTER. HE WENT SO FAR AS TO ADVOCATE RESISTANCE
TO THE ESTABLISHED CIVIL ORDER IF NECESSARY BY FORCE.
HE WAS A BEARDED REVOLUTIONARY, GIVEN TO HARANGUING PUBLIC
MEETINGS. HE FELT THOROUGHLY DISAFFECTED WITH THE " SYSTEM".
HE DISPARAGED'THE MONARCHY. IF. HE HAD BEEN ALIVE TODAY HE
WOULD HAVE MARCHED IN MORATORIUMS AND SUPPORTED THE PEACE
MOVEMENT, I DOUBT IF HIS CHILDREN WOULD HAVE GONE TO THIS SCHOOL.
4 
A*. IN THE LITURGY HE DEVISED FOR THE CHURCH ONE IS
STRUCK BY CERTAIN CONTEMPORARY PARALLELS. KNOX BELIEVED
THAT MINISTERS SHOULD BE ELECTED BY THE PEOPLE BUT APPOINTED*
BY THEIR MINISTERIAL BRETHREN. THAT IS MORE OR LESS. HOW WE
RUN THE CAUCUS.-HE BELIEVED THAT FINAL AUTHORLTY IN THE
CHURCH SHOULD LIE WITH A GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONTAINING ELDERS
. AND MINISTERS, THAT IS RATHER LIKE OUR FEDERAL CONFERENCE,.."':
SO YOU CAN SEE THE SOURCES OF OUR INSPIRATION. YOU CAN SEE
WHY I'VE COME TO YOUR SPEECH NIGHT. IN THE LABOR PARTY WE.
OWE AS MUCH TO KNOX THE MAN AS WE DO TO KNOX THE SCHOOL. HE'*
ALSO HELb EXEMPLARY VIEWS ON EDUCATION. J. S. MCEWEN, WHO
WROTE A STUDY OF KNox's RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, POINTS OUT THAT
IN THE BOOK OF DISCIPLINE KNOX OUTLINED A MOST ELABORATE'
EDUCATIONAL SCHEME FROM PARISH SCHOOL UP TO UNIVERSITY,
COMPULSORY IN ITS EARLY STAGES FOR ALL AND FREE TO THE POOR$
WITH EQUAL OPPORTUNITY OF ADVANCEMENT FOR THE SON OF' PEASANT
AND OF. PEER." 4, I&amp; THOSE WORDS ARE NOT MINE BUT I SHOULD-BE
QUITE HAPPY TO SEE THEM IN OUR PARTY PLATFORM.
IT IS TYPICAL OF KNOX THAT HE GAVE NO THOUGHT TO
THE DAGHITER. S OF PEASANT OR PEER. IN THESE ENLIGHTENED DAYS
WE PROVIDE GIRLS WITH INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS THAT ARE JUST: AS
EFFICIENT, JUST AS RESPECTED, ' JUST AS WELL ENDOWED AS THOSE
FOR BOYS. IWAS ASTONISHED THE OTHER DAY TO FIND A BOOK
WRITTEN BY THE FORMER HEADMISTRESS OF SUCH A SCHOOL. IT
WOULD BE UNFAIR TO MENTION THE NAME OF THE SCHOOL OR THE
NAME OF THE AUTHOR, BUT THE BOOK WAS CALLED ' INDISCRETIONS
OF A HEADMISTRESS". " I WAS CONNED BY THE TITLE. ,1 
: t
t W-4-MANY PEOPLE BROWSING THROUGH THE PAPERBACKS AT AIRPORT
BOOKSTALLS MUST HAVE BEEN DISAPPOINTED WHEN THEY READ IT.
I DO NOT MEAN TO. DISPARAGE THE BOOK. ITS CONTENTS WERE
PIOUS AND ENTIRELY ADMIRABLE. IT WAS THE TITLE THAT GOT
IF
ME IN. IT OCCURRED TOME THAT/ THE KARMEL REPQRT HAD
BORNE HALF SO SUGGESTIVE A TITLE IT WOULD HAVE ACHIEVED
A MUCH WIDER CIRCULATION, IF NOT A WIDER ACCEPTANCE.
NOW I KNOW THE KARMEL REPORT IS A SORE POINT WITH 4
SOME OF. YOU, BUT I SHOULD LIKE TO TOUCH ON IT BRIEFLY. I
HAVE DONE MY HOMEWORK, AND I NOTICED AN EDITORIAL ON KARMEL
IN THE " KNOX GRAMMARIAN" OF JUNE THIS YEAR. IT WELCOMED
THE REPLACEMENT OF OLD FASHIONED " ROTE LEARNING" BY MODERN
CONCEPTS OF TEACHING. IT DEPLORED THE FACT THAT THIS
TRANSITION WAS PROCEEDING TOO SLOWLY, AND THAT THE NECESSARY
ATMOSPHERE OF DISCOVERY AND ADVENTURE IN THE CLASSROOM WAS
BREAKING DOWN. IT WENT ON TO SAY: " THE BLAME FOR THIS
STAGNATION IN EDUCATION CAN BE GIVEN WHOLLY TO THE POLICY
MAKERS WHO FIND CHANGE INTOLERABLE. THE KARMEL REPORT IS
OF COURSE, THE BEST EXAMPLE OF THIS. THEY FOUND THAT PRIVATE
SCHOOLS WERE TOO FAR AHEAD OF STATE SCHOOLS IN IDEAS AND
APPLICATIONS. TE WAY THEY STIFLED OR HALTED THESE
' RADICAL' EXPENSIVE IDEAS WAS TO CUT OUT FUNDS TO THESE
SCHOOLS. NOW THEY WANT TO STANDARDIZE EDUCATION ON THE
SAME MEDIOCRE LEVEL." CONCEPTS~ I~~ ~~~ E~ L RDTEFC OFTAHHN, T TI il 
I MUST SAY THIS IS THE FIRST TIME I HAVE BEEN
ACCUSED OF FINDING CHANGE INTOLERABLE. As ONE WHO HAD A
LOT TO DO WITH PROFESSOR KARMEL'S APPOINTMENT AND THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION, I CANNOT ALLOW THAT
ACCUSATION TO PASS.:-ONE CAN ARGUE ABOUT THE MERITS OF MODERN
EDUCATIONAL THEORY BUT I DON'T THINK ONE CAN ARGUE ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF MONEY TO EDUCATION$. THE SCOTS, TO THEIR GREAT..-.'
CREDIT, HAVE NEVER HAD ANY DOUBT ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF-'
MONEY. WEALTH DOES NOT NECESSARILY MAKE FOR A GOOD-SCHOOL
BUT POVERTY ASSUREDLY MAKES FOR A BAD ONE. OUR POLICIES ON
EDUCATION ARE NOT INTENDED TO " STANDARDIZE EDUCATION ON THE
SAME'MEDIOCRE LEVEL". THEY ARE INTENDED TO RAISE ALL
SCHOOLS TO THE HIGHEST LEVEL. I-ACCEPT THAT IT MAY NOTALWAYS
BE POSSIBLE TO DO THIS. I ACCEPT THAT THERE WILL PROBABLY
ALWAYS BE SOME SCHOOLS NOT NECESSARILY PRIVATE SCHOOLS
THAT ARE BETTER THAN OTHERS. No AMOUNT OF PLANNING Oft
FUNDING CAN OFFSET THE EFFECTS OF, SAY, INCOMPETENT MANAGEMENT,
DISHARMONY'AMONG STAFF# OR A LACK OF MORALE OR ESPRIT
DE CORPS.
A 
THESE THINGS ARE INTANGIBLE AND VERY LARGELY
FORTUITOUS. IT IS NOT DIFFICULT TO ACCEPT, HOWEVER, THAT
MATERIAL DEPRIVATION CAN BE OVERCOME WITH ADDITIONAL FUNDS.
IF A SCHOOL IS DISADVANTAGED, IF IT IS POOR, WE CAN HELP
RAISE ITS STANDARDS. BY PROVIDING THE BUILDINGS, THE
EQUIPMENT, THE BOOKS, THE SALARIED STAFF THAT IT NEEDS.
LONG BEFORE WE CAME TO OFFICE IT WAS MANIFESTLY'CLEAR
THAT MANY SCHOOLS LACKED FUNDS FOR BASIC NECESSITIES.
SOME WERE IN GREATER NEED THAN OTHERS. I SHOULD HAVE
THOUGHT IT A VERY SIMPLE AND OBVIOUS PRINCIPLE IT WOULD
NOT BE PUTTING IT TOO HIGHLY TO SAY A CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLE
THAT THE MOST DEPRIVED CHILDREN SHOULD HAVE THE FIRST
CALL ON OUR HELP. WE DECIDED THAT THE SCHOOLS MOST IN
NEED SHOULD BENEFIT MOST FROM ADDITIONAL FEDERAL FUNDS.
WE DECIDED THAT THESE NEEDS COULD BEST BE ASSESSED BY
AN EXPERT, IMPARTIAL, INDEPENDENT INQUIRY. WE SET UP
THAT INQUIRY. WE MADE PUBLIC ITS REPORT. WE ACTED
ON THAT REPORT. IT WAS NOT JUST A QUESTION OF REDISTRIBUTING
EXISTING FUNDS. IT WAS A MATTER OF CHANNELLING VASTLY
AUGMENTED FUNDS TO THE SCHOOLS THAT NEEDED THEM. THERE
WAS NEVER ANY QUESTION OF LEVELLING DOWN. OUR AIM IS
TO RAISE ALL STANDARDS. WE ARE DETERMINED THAT THE BEST
EDUCATION AVAILABLE ANYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA SHOULD BE
AVAILABLE EVERYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA. / 8
LIIII~ 
' 2 AC ~ 4.4
IHAVE NEVER DOUBTED THAT OUR REFORMS IN EDUCATION
HAVE BEEN THE PROUDEST ACHIEVEMENT OF my GOVERNMENT. WE
ARE SPENDING FOUR TIMES AS MUCH AS OUR PREDECESSORS ON
EDUCATION.-WE HAVE ASSUMED FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, AND HAVE ABOLISHED FEES. FOR THE..
FIRST TIME WE ARE* GIVING ASS ISTANCE TO TEACHERS COLLEGES
AND PRE-SCHOOL TEACHERS'I COLLEGES ON THE SAME BASIS AS
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION: WE ARE
GIVING MUCH MORE GENEROUS ALLOWANCES TO STUDENTS AND
HAVE MORE THAN TREBLED THE NUMBER OF TEACHING SCHOLARSHIPS$..
WE ARE TACKLING THE NEW AREA OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER,
EDUCATION. ISHOULD LIKE TO THINK THAT THE MOST ENDURING
RESULT OF OUR POLICIES ON EDUCATION HAS BEEN TO RAISE
THE COMMUNITY'I S LE VEL OF EXPECTATION. WE HAVE-SET OUR
SIGHTS HIGHER.. TH* E WHOLE DEBATE. ON EDUCATION HAS MOVED
TO A HIGHER PLANE, FREE OF DOGMA1 FREE OF PREJUDICE, FREE
OF SECTARIANISM$ -THERE IS NO LONGER ANY QUESTION ABOUT
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR EDUCATION;~
IN THE CASE OF TERTIARY EDUCATION IT IS ACCEPTED
ABSOLUTELY. THERE IS NO LONGER ANY DEBATE ABOUT ' STATE
AID'. THERE'IS NO LONGER ANY ARGUMENT ABOUT THE
SCHOOLS COMMISSION, THE HISTORIC INCREASE IN EDUCATION
EXPENDITURE WAS UNIVERSALLY ACCEPTED AND WELCOMED,. EVEN
BY THOSE WHO DISPUTE THE WAY THOSE FUNDS HAVE BEEN
ALLOCATED. ' A 
INITIATED BY^ LABOR OT N 9 I TTHE., V.* ; N,. 57
IT HAS TAKEN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS NEARLY
SIR KEITH MURRAY'S COMMITTEEREPORTED THE NEEDS
100 YEARS TO ESTABLISH THE PRINCIPLE THAT EDUCATION IS r.
A NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY. MORE THAN 30 YEARS HAVE
PASSED SINCE THE FIRST STEPS IN THIS PR WERE SBYTER
INITIATED BY A LABOR GOVERNMENT. IN 1957, WITH THE
UNIVERSITIES OVERLOADED AND E E OINODNE PCEONMDMEONNWTE ALTH
SFUNDS SIR KEITH MURRAY'S COMMITTEE REPORTED ON THE NEEDS
OF UNIVERSITIES AND IN 1959 A NEW UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION
WAS ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE. THEREAFTERI UNIVERSITIES.
BENEFITED FROM SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASED FUNDS AND WERE
ON A REGULAR AND RATIONAL ASSESSMENT OF THEIR NEEDS.
WHAT WE ARE NOW DOING FOR PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
IS PRECISELY WHAT SIR ROBERT MENZIES A GOOD PRESBYTERIAN
DID FOR UNIVERSITIES. IN 1
FIFTY YEARS AGO THE ROLE OF INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
WAS MUCH MORE DISTINCTIVE THAN IT IS TODAY. WHEN I WAS
AT KNOX IT WAS MORE OR LESS ACCEPTED THAT THE MAJORITY
WHO ENTERED SUCH SCHOOLS WOULD FINISH THEIR SECONDARY
EDUCATION AND, IF POSSIBLE, MATRICULATE. IT WAS UNDERSTOOD
AND NO ONE RESENTED THE FACT THAT SCHOOLS LIKE KNOX
OFFERED THE QUICKEST AND SUREST ACCESS TO THE
PROFESSIONS AND THE HIGHER MANAGERIAL AND EXECUTIVE
OCCUPATIONS THAT WAS A PERFECILY RESPECTABLE AIM
IT IS STILL YOUR AIM BUT IT IS NO LONGER ONE THAT
YOU HOLD EXCLUSIVELY IN 1924,. I CAME TO KNOX,
PER CENT OF ALL CHILDREN IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES WERE AT GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS, 
f
4 4J,
, i r..
Z
YET OF ALL THOSE WHO WENT-TO THE LEAVING AND THROUGH
THE LEAVING IN 1924 ONLY 57 PER CENT CAME FROM
GOVERNMENT, SCHOOLS., THE REST WERE EVENLY DIVIDED BETWEEN
ROMAN CATHOLIC AND. ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT SCHOOLS. A
I.
* 1*
THE ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT SCHOOLS PLACED
MUCH GREATER STRESS ON CLASSICAL EDUCATION IN THOSE DAYS.
BACK IN 1924, 126 CHILDREN FROM ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT
SCHOOLS . PASSED LATIN AT THE LEAVING ALMOST AS MANY AS
PASSED FROM GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS ( 144). YET GOVERNMENT
SCHOOLS HAD 20 TIMES AS MANY CHILDREN AS SCHOOLS LIKE
KNOX. LATIN WAS'MORE POPULAR WITH PRIVATE . CHOOLS.
MORE THAN HALF THE PUPILS AT ANGLICAN AND PROTESTANT
SCHOOLS WHO PASSED THE LEAVING IN 1924 ALSO PASSED IN
LATIN ( 126 OUT OF 210). LAST YEAR MORE THAN 32,000
CHILDREN SAT FOR THE HIGHER SCHOOL CERTIFICATE IN NEW SOUTH
WALES; 446 PASSED IN LATIN.. So ALTHOUGH LATIN IS
STUDIED BY A MUCH SMALLER PROPORTION OF THE SCHOOL
POPULATION TODAY, WE ARE ACTUALLY PRODUCING MORE LATIN
SCHOLARS. THAT IS SOME CONSOLATION FOR SOMEONE LIKE
MYSELF WITH A CERTAIN PREJUDICE IN FAVOUR OF CLASSICAL
LANGUAGES. I I./ i1 
9-7 YOU MAY SOMETIMES BE TEMPTED TO IMAGINE THAT
my GOVERNMENT IS INDIFFERENT OR EVEN HOSTILE TO INDEPENDENT
SCHOOLS. THAT IS NOT SO. IAGREE THAT WARE MOSTCONCERNED
WITH THE NEEDS OF THE LESS FORTUNATE-SCHOOLS.
BUT IT WOULD BE IRRATIONAL TO CONCLUDE THAT THIS
* CONCERNo URGENT AND VALID AS IT IS, BLINDS US
TO THE QUALITIES OF SCHOOLS SUCH AS YOURS OR MAKES US ANY
LESS MINDFUL OF YOUR CONTRIBUTION TO THE EDUCATIONAL
NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY. YOU HAVE GREAT TRADITIONS.
YOU HAVE'A GREAT RECORD OF-ACHIEVEMENT. YOU ADHERE'TO
STANDARDS OF EXCELLENCE AND A SET OF CORPORATE AND
INDIVIDUAL VALUES THAT ARE WORTH PRESERVING.
BY HARD WORK, BY GREAT EFFORT AND PATIENCE AND MUCH
SACRIFICE YOU HAVE CREATED A SCHOOL OF THE VERY
HIGHEST QUALITY, IN A SETTING OF GREAT BEAUTY. THERE
IS AT KNOX AND SCHOOLS LIKE IT A VERY PALPABLE SPIRIT
OF DEDICATION, OF STRIVING, OF TOTAL COMMITMENT TO
THE WELFARE OF EVERY CHILD. / 12 
-THESE THINGS ARE ENVIABLE. IT WOULD BE ABSURD AND MEANSPIRITED
TO DESPISE THEM. HOPE THEY WILL SERVE AS
EXAMPLES TO THOSE OF US WHO SEEK TO BRING TO ALL
CHILDREN THE BENEFITS OF THE BEST POSSIBLE EDUCATIONA
PROVIDED IN THE BEST POSSIBLE SURROUNDINGS BY THE BEST
POSSIBLE TEACHERS, AND GUIDED BY THE MOST HUMANE AND
ENLIGHTENED PRINCIPLES OF SCHOLARSHIP AND DISCIPLINE.
ICONGRATULATE ALL THE PRIZEWINNERS TONIGHT. I CONGRATULATE
KNOX, ITS COUNCIL, ITS HEADMASTER, ITS STAFF AND ITS
BOYS 0CM THEIR JUBILEE. I WISH YOU THE VERY BEST OF
GOOD FORYLUNE INh~-9' 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE LAUNCHING OF
" GRAB FOR POWER"
BY LAURIE OAKES AND DAVID SOLOMON
9 DECEMBER 1974
Reminding this distinguished gathering and
also all those who listen to and view the media how much
my Government has meant to the publishing industry.
When I first tarted launching books at the request of
the Australian publishers the books were printed overseas.
The Australians were the authors but the printers and the
publishers were not. On this occasion there are distinguishedI
Australian writers, authors and skilled printers and, I trust,
prosperous-publishers.
It's the " Grab for Power" the book is called.
Another from the tree of Oakes and Solomon. Some people may
see a similarity between the events which precipitated this
latest tome and the present time. Nothing is so dead as
last weekA scandal. Anybody reading this book will see how
issues which were regarded as overwhelming, at the outset of
the campaign, whie/ proper grabs for power are made, how
they can be transmuted in the hands of skilled practitioners
during the campaign. The public gets a sense of proportion.
The public sees what are the alternatives. They have to see
not only the faults of the incumbents but the deficiencies
of the challengers. This book is, I'm certain,. bound to be read by a
very great number of people, from all walks of life.
It is a fascinating story. Racily written, an exciting
story. At the same time it is a substantial work of research
and there will be young and old read about it, there will
be professors reading it and ofcourse sayin g how much better
they would have done it themselves, and I suppose if you
can wait for decades that may be true. And there will
be aspiring politicians who will say how much better they
would have done it, achieved it or avoided it. I would
like to pay tribute'to the authors, because I've never 
I would like to paC t::. rhute to) hLo; h
because I. have never known opeople to work so thoroughly and
api: ly as Oakes and Solomon, They're very much -etter
authors of books than interpr:..:-ers in the cdii;. papers.
You can always rely on yesterdayi s paper beinc-li; carded,
nobody can find it. But books like this endure' Thy will
He around for a long time, and I believe it will stand the
passage of time.
There are similarities, aren't there between what
people thought were the circumstances of last April and
what some people think are the circumstances of today.
But I think the Australian people have learnt from two
aspects of the events of last April and May. The people
who grabbed for power last April thought that Australians
didn't know what went on in the rest of the world. They
thought we were still an isolated, insular, backward
people. In fact Australians, largely due to the press,
are now aware of what goes on in other parts of-the world.
They know that Australia isn't so different from other
countries, that in fact all the countries in which
Australians are interested are very similar to Australiasocially,
politically and economically. We all influence
each other. And this is a process which is going to become
more marked instead of less marked. All the things which
appal people, distress people and I dare say, in the next
couple of months will make many people hysterical, are
also being found in other countries the countries that
people visit in the course of their duties. The countries
which people should study. The countries with which wer
trade. The countries with which we compare ourselves.
Appail-ng unemployment figures in Australia at the moment,
but not as bad as in North America or most countries of
western Europe or Japan. And the measures which I announced
a month ago ad some which I will be announcing, not directly
face to face, orally as I am speaking to you now, but in
a prepared statement, will I am sure convince you that in
these matters Australia is not only still more successful
than any comparable country but in fact is taking steps 
-3-
which will mean that the position will improve improve
markedly be seen to improve and be certainly very much
betterbefore any other grab can be achieved.
There's another lesson I believe we have to draw
in addition to that concerning the similarities of conditions
in Australia and those in North America, Western Europe and
Japan and that is the sheer impropriety of what was done
politically last April. Some people believe that having
done it once, even though they didn't get away with it,
they should or could do it again. I don't believe that
Australians are impressed with those who still seek to
destroy the system, t. o make it unworkable. In April,
in May, nobody sought a mandate to use the Senate against
either side which succeeded in getting a majority in the
House of Representatives. There are often references to
mandates. Mandates apparently are sometimes doubted when
they're in the hands of those who win. But people, it
would be extraordinary if it were held that mandates are
in the hands of those who didn't succeed in getting enough
seats. Now last April and last May the campaign was to
form a Government and the Government was returned. There
was never any threat, at that time, by the challengers
that if they didn't get a majority in the House of
Representatives they would still try to achieve a
combination in the Senate which would thwart the side which
got the majority in the House of Representatives. No mandate
was sought, nobody came clean then and yet that apparently is
the threat which is being held now. If you lose twice you
can still destroy the system. Now of course it is difficult
to govern in Australia now, it is difficult to govern in
any comparable country, there is no head of government anywhere
in the Western world and for that purpose one includes Japan,
Australia and New Zealand who can rest securely or serenely.
The system is under challenge everywhere., whether it is a
system of divided powers, such as in the United States or
whether it is a system of Presidential powers, such as in
France or whether it is a Westminster system as in Britain
itself or in Australia or in New Zealand. In all these systems
there is immense stress and we jeopardise the system at our
peril because in each case there ir a history, there are some 
-4-
traditions, there are some conventions which have made the
system work and those who jeopardise the system have nothing*
to put in its place. These are serious matters. I sometimes4
on these occasionsA,, fl somewhat more flippant. But I expect
you expect me to say something rather more serious because
there are economic and there are Political matters arising
from last April from which we should all learn. It is important
that the political system in Australia should be effective.
It should be seen to be effective, socially and economically
and those who grab power and fail, those who do not get the
support * of the people at an election should not try to make
the system unworkable thereafter. We are ending a year
in the Australian Parliament where some bills have had to be
debated seven times before they have gone through. Seven times,
three times in each House and at a Joint Sitting. ( unclear)
Joint Sitting is held and the inevitable results flow from all
six bills which came before it after six debates . before being
debated at the Joint Sitting, Since that time there have been
eleven more bills passed by the House of Representatives and
rejected by the Senate and in most cases those bills were
precisely stated in the policy speech of the Government party
last April. Ladies and Gentlemen , this grab for power should
be a very salutary lesson to all. For whateitver polls may say
and there was a Western Australian poll a couple of weeks
before the grab was made-and whatever the economics, statistics
and indices may show-and they were deteriorating last March and
last april whaterver ephemeral scand als may emerge and be
blown up. The fact in that the grab failed ( unclear) and that
any further grab is similar circumstances or ciruinstances which
people thought similar, circumstances which blow some people's
tops, any similar grabs~ imilarly will fail. Its al-la question
of how soon Oakes and Solomon write the next book. I am satisfied
that I will be launching it and in the same happy circumstances.
I congratulate the authors, printers and the publishers and
I am certain there will be thousands of readers for Christmas and
in the following years who will enjoy am happy
to contribute to it somehow. It has at least solved my
Christmas problem anyway. 



Belgium Speech by the Prime Minister of Belgium, M. Leo Tindemans, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Brussels on
16 December 1974
I take great pleasure in welcoming you to Belgium
and also in welcoming Mrs Whitlam, the
Minister of State, and the important Australian
Delegation.
While our two countries are geographically
separated by a great distance, this does not
necessarily mean that our political and moral
aims are different. Quite the contrary, our two
countries are fundamentally attached to political
democracy and improvement in international
relationships, in order to keep peace in the
world and to develop that peace based on a
greater justice.
There also exists a convergence in the foreign
policies followed by our two countries lately,
among others in the United Nations Organisation,
in order to contribute to international
detente. This is in particular the case with the
action we are developing within the framework
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty with the aim of
organising control of nuclear tests.
It was with great interest that I learnt about the
main trends of your home and foreign policy.
At home your Government at present aims at a
greater centralisation and reinforcing of the
responsibilities of the state in the economic and
social field.
As to foreign policy, your country is concerned
about a greater independence and endeavours
to show a characteristically Australian identity.
I believe that our two countries are becoming
more and more aware of the fact that we are at
the start of a period that forces us to consider our
international relationships and to place us in a
renewed framework. The present world can hardly be content with
the bipolar balance that has dominated these
international relationships.
Your country, just like ours, is anxious to contribute
to the development of subcontinental
organisations or communities of nations, after
the manner of our friendly countries of Western
Europe within the framework of the European
Union. I hope that the efforts we undertake in a parallel
direction in this international community will
bear fruit in the near future, in order to make the
same aims prevail.
I also hope that the bilateral relations between
your country and Belgium will be reinforced in
the years to come. These relations already
assume a very important nature in the trade
field. Your country exports to our country important
quantities of iron ore, textile and food products;
we export to your country manufactured goods
which seem to be particularly appreciated by
your Government. I am thinking for instance of
the electronic sector.
It would be desirable if our business relations
could be developed in other fields, in the sector
of uranium, and especially if a more intense
industrial co-operation could be envisaged
between our two countries, for instance through
participating in industrial co-operation agreements.
Prime Minister, today was the first day of your
visit to our country.
I believe our first discussions have been fruitful 
so that one can envisage concrete progress in
the above-mentioned fields.
I hope that tomorrow you will be able to go
deeply into the different aspects of our future
collaboration, not only as to what concerns our
own country, but also in regard to the relationships
with the European Economic Community.
The Prime Minister with the Prime Minister of Belgium, 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of Belgium in Brussels on
16 December 1974
Thank you, Prime Minister, for the warm and
gracious welcome you have accorded my wife
and me and the members of my party. It is
fitting that my visit to Europe should begin here
in Brussels, the very capital of Europe, a city
ancient in its culture and history yet symbolising
all that is modern and contemporary in the
new Europe. It is fifteen years since an Australian
Prime Minister made an official visit to
Belgium and the other capitals of Europe. Ten,
or even five years ago, no Australian Prime
Minister would have visited Brussels before
going to London. No Australian Prime Minister
would have discussed in Brussels matters
affecting not only Australia's relations with Belgium
but her relations with Britain and Europe.
For our part, nothing could illustrate more
clearly the momentous changes that have
occurred in recent years-in Belgium, in Britain,
in Europe, in Australia, in the world at large. I
welcome the opportunity to reaffirm the
strength of our friendship. Throughout this era
of historic change relations between Belgium
and Australia have grown and strengthenedfounded
as they are in common cultural traditions
and based on the enduring Western
values of liberty, democracy and the rule of law.
There is an impression abroad-in Australia and
elsewhere-that Europe no longer matters to
Australia, and that our destiny now lies exclusively
with Asia, Japan and the nations to our
north. That is a false impression. It is true that
Australia has developed closer and more realistic
ties with Asia and Japan. Our trade with
those nations has increased three-fold in the
last twenty years, and Japan is now our biggest
single trading partner. No one welcomes more
than I do the historic trends that have brought
Australia closer to the nations of her own region,
deepened our friendship with our neighbours
and sharpened our sense of regional responsibility.
No one has worked harder to encourage
those trends. But it would be a grave mistake to
suppose that our greater involvement in Asia
means a lesser involvement in Europe. Australia's interests in Europe are of great and
growing importance.
Britain and Europe take roughly one-third of our
exports. Our involvement in Asia and our involvement
in Europe are not mutually exclusive.
They are complementary. They reflect not only
our desire-a natural desire-to enlarge our role
in the world, but a growing trend towards interdependence
between all nations. On my first
visit to Brussels as Prime Minister I reaffirm
Australia's profound and lasting interest in
Europe, our support for the European ideal, and
our desire for stronger and closer ties with all
European nations.
Australia has always given her full support to
the concept of a united Europe. It is true that we
have sought to safeguard our own trading
interests as best we can, but on the wider issue
of European unity there has never been any
question of our support for the high principles
and noble aspirations that guide and sustain the
European community. Australia believes deeply
in the value of regional co-operation at the
economic and political levels: in our own region
we have done our best to promote it. How natural,
then, that we should support one of the
greatest and most successful examples of
regional integration ever attempted by sovereign
nations. I acknowledge the anxiety that
many Australians felt at the prospect of Britain's
entry. Speaking for myself, it seemed to me a matter of
profound historical justice, of singular ' rightness',
that within the space of a week in 1971,
two of the world's greatest nations were committed
to membership of organisations to which
they were destined to belong-China was
admitted to the United Nations General Assembly,
and the House of Commons voted in favour
of Britain's entry to the European Community.
May I say, Prime Minister, how greatly Australians
admire your own contribution to the
cause of Europe and Belgium's central role in
that cause. This city, always one of the loveliest 
in Europe, now enjoys a new eminence and a
proud status as the institutional capital of the
European communities and the headquarters of
its most significant and enduring security alliance.
Australians for many years honoured
your predecessor, the late Paul-Henri Spaak, as
a statesman of world stature and one of the
founding spirits of the Common Market.
It is appropriate that you, Sir, have been
charged by the recent conference of Heads of
Government of the Community with the task of
reporting to them on the prospects and progress
of European political unity. In that difficult and
complex undertaking, I have no doubt that your
efforts will bring closer the fundamental and
guiding objective which for twenty years has
provided the inspiration and philosophical basis
of the European experiment-the belief that
independent states may one day submerge
their political differences and come together in a
political union.
There are pressing reasons why nations'of all
kinds must seek a unity of purpose, a greater
measure of co-operation and understanding.
The whole world-Australia no less than Belgium,
our own region no less than Europe-is
beset by problems of unprecedented difficulty,
of daunting complexity, of great danger. Overpopulation,
pollution, the energy shortage, terrorism,
racial tensions are some of the most
urgent. Overhanging the economies of the
Western nations are the twin problems of
unemployment and inflation. Because these
problems are global in their scope and origin,
the solutions to them must be international
solutions. It is folly to pretend that they will be
solved by nations, or even groups of nations,
acting alone or in isolation.
What is at stake is not just the ability of democratic
states to manage their economies, but
people's faith in the ability of democracy to survive.
Must the democracies concede that only
authoritarian regimes can cope with inflation
and employment? This is a battle that the
democracies must win, not just for the sake of
their economies, but for the sake of their democratic
institutions. Here in Europe, where the
highest living standards are combined with the
highest measure of personal freedom and a
unique abundance of cultural and artistic riches,
the advanced industrial nations have a supreme incentive to preserve the strength of their system
and overcome the social economic and environmental
problems that threaten its survival.
No nation has pursued a more active policy of
international co-operation than Belgium during
the past quarter of a century. I pay tribute to that
effort. You are a member of the United Nations,
a member of NATO, a member of the Council of
Europe and Western European Union. You are
one of the Benelux countries. You are a member
of Euratom, the European Coal and Steel Community
and, of course, the EEC. Your support for
the Atlantic Alliance and an integrated Europe
has provided the basis of a viable Belgian
foreign policy. There is not a better example of
the ability of a small power to set an example of
co-operation and exercise an influence for good
out of all proportion to its size and population.
There is another reason why European union is
profoundly important for the world. It has a
poignant relevance to my own country no less
than yours. Thousands of Australians fought
and died in Belgium during the two world wars.
Ypres, Mons, Messines are names firmly
engraved on the consciousness of the Australian
people. I visited this morning the tomb of
the Unknown Soldier and every year the Australian
Ambassador in this city attends a
ceremony at the Menin Gate in memory of the
Belgian and Australian soldiers who fought as
comrades in arms. We recall the suffering of
those days, not to glorify war but to reaffirm the
spirit of peace which is so much a part of the
spirit of the new Europe. All your plans, all your
hopes, all your ambitions for a greater and more
prosperous Europe rest on the preservation of
peace. If your Community achieves nothing
else, the world will rejoice that for the first time
the threat of war has been lifted from a continent
ravaged by the most terrible wars in
history. In this context I commend the action of your
Government in ratifying the nuclear nonproliferation
treaty. Australia has worked
consistently for the strengthening of that treaty.
We regard it as crucial to the preservation of
peace and the survival of civilisation. The
alternative is a nightmare world in which dozens
of nations may possess nuclear weapons by the
early 1980s. Yet six years after the treaty was
concluded and four years after it came into 
force, some states-including some states in
Europe-have still to ratify the treaty or make
clear their renunciation of nuclear weapons
development. Australia and Belgium are comparatively small
powers. Remote as we are from each other in
terms of distance, we have a great deal in common.
We are affluent nations in a world of widespread
poverty. We are highly industrialised.
We are devoted to regional co-operation. Our
bilateral trade, though modest in scale, has
grown steadily and exhibits a remarkable balance.
Australia's exports to Belgium in
1973-74 were worth $ A59000000: Belgium's
exports to Australia were worth
$ A57 000 000. Australia's ties with Europe
have been strengthened since World War II by a
vast immigration program. It is a reminder to us
that modern civilisation in Australia sprang from
the great tide of European colonisation in the
19th century-a process of colonisation in
which Belgium played her part.
To the north, east and west of Australia there
are many nations which were once parts of
European empires. These links with Europe
have left an enduring mark on the newer
nations of Africa, Asia and the Pacific. Australia,
like many other states in her region, has set her
own firm and independent course in world
affairs. In doing so we acknowledge our historic
and cultural debt to Europe and look to the
nations of Europe for support and collaboration
in overcoming the problems shared by all mankind.
I take heart from the great achievement in
international co-operation we have witnessed
in Europe itself-an achievement in which your
own country has played a lasting and a leading
role. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at the International
Press Centre in Brussels on 18 December 1974
I am conscious that my visit to Europe-the first
by an Australian Prime Minister for fifteen
years-coincides with a growing sense of crisis
in international economic affairs. Continuing
high rates of inflation, the threat of emergent
recessionary forces, severe balance of payments
problems for many countries, strains on international
monetary mechanisms and the accentuation
of the problems of the developing countries
constitute pressures of a magnitude and
diversity which the world has not faced since
the war. The European Community is the largest single
trading bloc in the world. The impact of these
developments on the relationships between the
Community and other countries and between
member nations within the Community is of
major significance to all the world's trading
countries. As the Head of Government of a trading
nation of growing significance, I believe
these events demonstrate with unmistakable
force the interdependence of the world's economies.
Such a comment may sound trite. There
are times, however, when restating the obvious
The Prime Minister speaks at the International Press Centre in Brussels.
r 



United Kingdom
Speech by the Prime Minister at the Mansion House, London, on
19 December 1974
I suppose I would be less than human if I did not
feel some sense of awe-even some slight
trepidation-at the prospect of addressing this
august gathering in this historic hall. An Australian
Prime Minister who comes to London is
made very much aware of his country's British
origins and its place in the scheme of things. He
is subtly reminded of the actions and reputations
of his predecessors, of the rich and
intricate fabric of history, law and tradition that
has shaped his country and the very nature of
his office. For an Australian Prime Minister,
London can never be just another city or Britain
just another country-however much a proud
and self-assertive people would like to think
them so.
I must confess that by past standards my
present visit to London has been somewhat
brash and unorthodox. It is more than two years
since a Labor Government was elected in
Australia, yet this is the first time I have spoken
to a British audience. My coming out in London
has been unconscionably delayed. A generation
ago no Australian Prime Minister would have
engaged in talks with Robin Day and David
Frost before talking to the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. No
Australian Prime Minister would have visited
Brussels before visiting London. Very likely, no
Australian Prime Minister would have visited
Brussels at all. There was a time when
Australia's main involvement with Europe was
on the battlefield. The real decisions on
Australia's trade, on her economic and financial
policies, on her foreign policies, on the very
borders of her States and Territories, were taken
in London. We were the creation of a great trading
empire at the height of its influence and prestige. We were the last frontier of European
colonial might. When Australia was settled
there was literally nowhere further for the
European to go. To me it is strikingly symbolic of
the link between British political and mercantile
power that the word ' corporation'--the very
name of this ancient assembly-has come to
denote both the municipal government of London
and the great network of financial institutions
that for so long influenced the destinies of
the Australian people.
Mr Wilson, the British Prime Minister,
welcomes Mr Whitlam. 
It is a commonplace to say that the world is rapidly
changing. Yet never has the truth of that
statement been more manifest than today. Little
that we have taken for granted, little to which
we are accustomed, little even that we hold
dear, has remained unaffected by the events of
the past thirty years, and especially by the pace
and scope of change in the 19 70' s. I do not
need to tell you of the difficulty and complexity
of the economic problems that confront every
western trading nation -Australia and Britain
among them. In Australia's case, not only has it
been necessary to accept changes in our thinking
and national life: it has been necessary to
welcome and promote changes. Since my
Government was elected it has pursued a new
course in its foreign affairs. We have sought a
more distinctive and independent role for
Australia, especially in our own region. We
have established new friendships and contacts
with other nations. While this has meant some
reappraisal of our traditional arrangements, the
changes we have made have not been at the
expense of old and proven friends. I want to
emphasise this; our policies were a response to a growing spirit of self-confidence and selfreliance
in Australian society. We have
developed a keener sense of national independence.
And I must say, in all frankness, it was
high time we did.
Some people-more in Australia than in
Britain-have regarded Australia's foreign poli
cies in recent years as some sort of aff ront to Bri
tamn; an insult to the Mother Country. Let me be
personal for a moment. I don't suppose there is
anyone in Australia, certainly no one else who is
still in public life, who has a greater love for
Britain than I have. Against very strong advice,
from friend and foe alike, I insisted on coming
here for Christmas. What better proof could
there be of my British sympathies. Not many of
my countrymen have a greater respect for
Britain's institutions and traditions than I do-a
greater knowledge of your history, a greater
affection for your language, your laws, your
literature, your unique intellectual traditions of
moderation, detachment, tolerance and liberty.
In saying this I don't want to sound boastful or
ingratiating. I want to dispel the impression that
A luncheon at the Mansion House giyen by the Lord Mayor of London in honour of the Prime Minister. 
Australia's attitude to Britain has been churlish
or nit-picking. What we seek is a more mature
and contemporary relationship with Britain-a
relationship based on a growing sense of
national pride and purpose.
For more than twenty years successive Australian
Governments saw our continent as a
small and insignificant country, an outpost of
European civilisation, exposed to the tides of
communism which threatened to engulf the
region, and prey to the covetous attentions of
our neighbours. These feelings were heightened
by a sense of geographical isolation, racial
and cultural, which established the main directions
of Australia's foreign relations from 1950
onwards. They ultimately led us to commit
Australian forces to the Viet-Nam War. They
led us to tolerate the increasing overseas ownership
and control of our industries and
resources. By December 1972 the external
environment and Australia's Government had
changed. Our perceptions of Australia's place
and role in international affairs had changed.
We never were small and insignificant. Our
economy is a good deal larger than the econom
ies of many European nations. We have ended
our military involvement in Viet-Nam. We have
recognised and established diplomatic relations
with all the countries in Asia and with many
other countries which were formerly ignored by
Australia. We have been a helpful and cooperative
neighbour in our region. In the United
Nations we have given steadfast support to the
causes of self-determination, disarmament and
anti-colonialism.
To a great extent the new directions in our
foreign policy have been influenced by Britain's
example. In 1972 we established formal relations
with the People's Republic of China:
Britain had done so in 1949. We withdrew our
forces from Indo-China: Britain had never committed
such forces. I doubt if anyone in this
country would take it amiss if I declared that
Australia's involvement in Viet-Nam had been
a mistake. It was a mistake, and only now are
we repairing the damage. Britain herself was in
the forefront of the great post-war movement
which brought self-determination and
independence to a host of former colonial states.
Once when Australians travelled to Europe,
every port and stop-over was ruled from London-
Singapore, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Malta, Port Said, Gibraltar. One of the triumphs of
British foreign policy has been the peaceful and
orderly transfer of power to the new selfgoverning
nations.
In the light of these changes, it was inevitable
and natural that Britain's relationship with
Australia would change too. The impetus for
change did not come from Australia alone.
Britain's historic move towards Europe meant a
change in her attitude to her Commonwealth
partners. Australia did not oppose or resent
Britain's involvement in Europe. Enlightened
opinion in my country welcomed and
encouraged it, just as the great financial institutions
of this city welcomed and encouraged it.
True enough, Britain's entry into Europe meant
some adjustment, a difficult adjustment, in
Australia's pattern of trade, but this process of
adjustment had begun with Britain's first
attempt to join the European Community in the
early 1960' s. Since that time Australia has
sought to diversify its trade in an effort to reduce
our dependence on the British market. In
1961-62, some 20 per cent of our exports
were directed to Britain. Britain was our principal
export market. Now, nearly two years after
Britain's entry into the European Community,
we sell only 6.5 per cent of our exports to
Britain. Many of our new markets are among the nations
of the Commonwealth, the great majority of the
members of the Commonwealth now lie in and
around the Indian and South Pacific Oceans. In
a geographical sense, Australia is much closer
to the new Commonwealth than Britain herself.
Far from being on the periphery we are much
nearer the centre. It is Britain, if I may say so,
that has become the outpost of European civilisation
in an organisation essentially oriented
toward Asian, Pacific, Indian Ocean and Caribbean
States. You hear a lot of disparagement of
the Commonwealth but you will never hear it
from Australia. The Commonwealth today provides
the world's largest regular forum for
meetings of Heads of Government. In this
respect it has no parallel, and Australia has
given the Commonwealth its fullest and most
active support.
It is against this background of economic and
political change that Australia has looked afresh
at her traditional relationship with Britain. There
are some things we have changed. Many of the 
things we have changed have been essentially
symbolic, but no less important for that. Many
of the changes would have been made whichever
government was in power in Australia;
indeed some of them had their origins in decisions
taken by my predecessors. One of our
first acts as a government was to amend Her
Majesty's Royal Style and Titles in Australia.
That change had the warm personal approval of
the Queen and the overwhelming endorsement
of the Australian people. The result is that
Queen Elizabeth II is now properly, proudly and
officially designated ' Queen of Australia'. She
has always been Queen of Australia; now she
bears the title, I am proud of it. It is an entirely
contemporary and appropriate title. It takes
account of popular feeling. It makes the
monarchy a closer and more relevant institution
for Australians.
We decided it was time Australia had a distinctive
national anthem and abandoned knighthoods
and other awards conferred in the name
of the British Empire. Other nations like Canada
had taken this course and public opinion in
Australia was fully in sympathy with such
changes. We no longer confer knighthoods in
the name of an empire that has ceased to exist.
We retain God Save The Queen on occasions
when Her Majesty is present or when it is
especially important to emphasise our links with
the Crown, but our official anthem, the only
anthem recognised by the Australian Government,
is Advance Australia Fair. All the evidence
suggests that Australians want an
anthem of their own. There is nothing particularly
surprising about this; it would be more
surprising if they didn't. Yet there are Australians
who see the choice of an anthem and
the rejection of Imperial Titles as an insult to the
Crown. I regard our preference for an Australian
anthem as a perfectly natural reflection of Australian
maturity and I am convinced that the Bri
tish people do likewise.
I give you another example. Six years ago an
earlier Australian Government-a conservative
government-abolished appeals to the Privy
Council in London from judgments of the Australian
High Court. That decision was accepted
in Australia without dissent. In the same way,
for the same reasons, my Government has
sought to abolish appeals to the Privy Council
from the Supreme Courts of the States. Our proposal has been resisted by the States. I
merely say this: no people with an ounce of selfrespect
would allow decisions made by their
own judges, appointed by their own governments
and sitting in their own courts, to be
overruled by judges sitting in another country
and appointed by the Government of another
country. We still retain procedures by which the
Governors of the States are commissioned by
the Queen-not as Queen of Australia but as
Queen of the United Kingdom. The commissions
are countersigned not by the Premier
of the State but by the British Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. I do not
think it unduly chauvinistic of Australians to
object to such a procedure. I do not think I am
alone in seeing something absurd in the proposal
to have a Queen of Queensland. Is there to
be a Queen of Alberta and a Queen of Prince
Edward Island? These are matters affecting
Australia's standing and reputation as a contemporary
independent nation.
Two of the great things we have inherited from
Britain are our tradition of judicial independence
and our parliamentary democracy. For a variety
of reasons, including the present strains on the
world economy, our democratic system has
come under challenge and in many countries is
afflicted by instability and frequent changes of
government. It is imperative that countries like
Australia and Britain ensure the survival of robust
democracy and individual liberty. I look
forward to discussions with your Prime Minister
on how the fabric of our democratic society can
be stengthened during the present economic
crisis. In saying this I do not want to adopt the
mantle of a prophet of doom. In Australia, as in
Britain, governments face serious problems of
inflation, a slowing down of growth and, for us,
a high level of unemployment. But these temporary
factors, unfortunate as they are, should
not obscure the fundamental long-term
strength of our economies. Must we admit that
only the Soviet Union among industrial and
trading nations can avoid unemployment and
inflation?
There has never been a time when the institutions
of government, the parliaments, the
courts-not only in Australia but in all
democracies-were more in need of strengthening.
There has never been a time when the
problems of society posed a greater challenge to 
the ingenuity and skill of governments. There
has never been a time when democratic institutions
have been so sternly challenged. In my
own country this year we saw the Upper House
in the national Parliament for the first time
refuse Supply to the elected government and
force a general election. It was a gross breach of
a hitherto unchallenged convention. Moreover,
so complex and cumbersome are Australia's
electoral laws that the new Parliament could not
convene for three months. Where else could a
Parliamentary democracy be without a Parliament
for so long?
Many in Britain may be aware that some of
Australia's State Governments have resented
some of the initiatives of my Government.
Indeed, after my visit in April last year Premiers
and State Attorneys-General flocked to London
to beseech the British Government to save them
from the Australian Government. The point in
issue can be solved within the Australian judicial
system established by the Australian
Constitution. There is no possible advantage to
Britain in embroiling the Queen, the Government
or the Courts of Britain in such Australian
domestic disputes. I shall not go into such matters
here, except to say this: The great lesson of
the Australian federal system, as in the
American, Canadian and West German federal
systems since the War, has been the need for
greater involvement, greater responsibility, on
the part of the national government. I give two
illustrations. In the two Australian States with
the largest populations it had become obvious
for a decade that only through the involvement
of the national government could the people in
new areas secure access to essential public services
such as health, higher education and public
transport. In the two States with the largest
areas, it had become obvious that only the
national government could safeguard Australian
control of the vast new natural resources
discovered in the past ten years. I believe the
federal system can be made to work, as it has
worked in other democracies, if the States
accept that Australians are one people, with
national interests and legitimate national aspirations,
and that there are some government
services and responsibilities that can only be
adequately provided and exercised if the Federal
Government is involved.
Those who see in some of our recent actions concerning Britain a manifestation of some strident
new nationalism or anti-British feeling
have completely misread our intentions and
mistaken the mood of our people. What
Australia istrying todoisestablish an independent
indentity in the world and especially in our
own region. We have grown up. Our actions are
in no way anti-British. They are simply pro-
Australian. I speak to you frankly because I
know there can never be any questions about
the enduring strength of Australia's ties with
Britain and the British people. The vast majority
of our people are of British stock. We wish to
build on British institutions. I believe that our
understanding and affection will deepen, rather
than diminish, as Australia assumes her rightful
place as a proud and independent nation, with a
distinctive role and a distinctive voice in her
region and in the world at large. 
/ if lm
p
The Prime Minister speaks to the press in Dublin.
I Ai 



Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at the International
Press Centre in Brussels on 18 December 1974
I am conscious that my visit to Europe-the first
by an Australian Prime Minister for fifteen
years-coincides with a growing sense of crisis
in international economic affairs. Continuing
high rates of inflation, the threat of emergent
recessionary forces, severe balance of payments
problems for many countries, strains on international
monetary mechanisms and the accentuation
of the problems of the developing countries
constitute pressures of a magnitude and
diversity which the world has not faced since
the war. The European Community is the largest single
trading bloc in the world. The impact of these
developments on the relationships between the
Community and other countries and between
member nations within the Community is of
major significance to all the world's trading
countries. As the Head of Government of a trading
nation of growing significance, I believe
these events demonstrate with unmistakable
force the interdependence of the world's economies.
Such a comment may sound trite. There
are times, however, when restating the obvious
The Prime Minister speaks at the International Press Centre in Brussels. 
force, some states-including some states in
Europe-have still to ratify the treaty or make
clear their renunciation of nuclear weapons
development. Australia and Belgium are comparatively small
powers. Remote as we are from each other in
terms of distance, we have a great deal in common.
We are affluent nations in a world of widespread
poverty. We are highly industrialised.
We are devoted to regional co-operation. Our
bilateral trade, though modest in scale, has
grown steadily and exhibits a remarkable balance.
Australia's exports to Belgium in
1973-74 were worth SA59 000000: Belgium's
exports to Australia were worth
$ A57 000000. Australia's ties with Europe
have been strengthened since World War II by a
vast immigration program. It is a reminder to us
that modern civilisation in Australia sprang from
the great tide of European colonisation in the
19th century-a process of colonisation in
which Belgium played her part.
To the north, east and west of Australia there
are many nations which were once parts of
European empires. These links with Europe
have left an enduring mark on the newer
nations of Africa, Asia and the Pacific. Australia,
like many other states in her region, has set her
own firm and independent course in world
affairs. In doing so we acknowledge our historic
and cultural debt to Europe and look to the
nations of Europe for support and collaboration
in overcoming the problems shared by all mankind.
I take heart from the great achievement in
international co-operation we have witnessed
in Europe itself-an achievement in which your
own country has played a lasting and a leading
role. 
is required and I believe this is such a time. Each
nation has its definable economic interests, but
the circumstances we face today emphasise the
importance of international co-operation-in
the common good and in the enlightened selfinterest
of all the world's trading nations.
In my discussions with European leaders I shall
indicate-as I have already done with the Prime
Minister of Belgium and President of the Commission-
that:
1. Australia recognises its overriding interest
in the stability of the international economy
and is willing to play its role in restoring
stability and promoting development;
2. Australia has its own specific interests and
objectives in economic matters and intends
to pursue them with vigour and determination;
and
3. Australia recognises the imbalance of
world development and attaches great
importance to the problems of developing
countries.
The pursuit of our interest in the restoration of
economic stability must take account of the
actions of the OPEC countries. The problems of
the western world are those of adjustment to a
new international economy. We are seeing a
redistribution of the world's wealth towards
resource-owning countries. The days are past
when the market value of the world's limited
supply of non-renewable resources-for example,
uranium-could be primarily determined
by the cost of their extraction and transportation-
a view which I know is now held within
the Commission. It is pointless for me not to acknowledge
that our interests are those of a
resource-rich nation. Nevertheless, we trade in
many goods, and across the broad range of our
trade Australia's prosperity depends on the
orderly development of the world economy. The
immediate adjustment processes involved in
the present transition threaten to disrupt our
trade in all areas.
The most pressing and immediate problem we
share with the rest of the world concerns the
strains on the international monetary system
and particularly the problem of recycling
petrodollars. We recognise the urgency and the
seriousness of this sudden development.
Australia has only a limited capacity to contribute
to the solution of this problem, but we stand ready to co-operate to the fullest degree possible.
In my discussions with European leaders I
look forward to broadening my understanding
of their attitudes and intentions in this regard.
There are other areas in which Australia can
make a more significant contribution to international
stability. Since the events of the oil
crisis, all countries have become aware of their
need for secure supplies of essential raw
materials. Australia is richly endowed with
resources. We possess major reserves of coal,
iron ore, bauxite, mineral sands and uranium
and important reserves of lead, zinc, manganese,
nickel and copper. Australia has been and
will continue to be a secure and reliable supplier
of all these commodities. We play a significant
and indeed a growing role in the world trade in
minerals. We shall continue to do so. We have a
reputation for honouring our contracts and we
intend to maintain that reputation. We shall
further develop our mineral resources, including
our energy reserves. We shall be willing
sellers seeking willing buyers. Thus we have
agreed to joint discussions with the Commission
on their needs for uranium and on supplies of
natural and enriched uranium from Australia for
this purpose. Insofar as Australia can contribute
to the stability of world energy supplies, we
shall do so.
We recently announced new developments in
our uranium policy. My Government has not
been prepared to approve further export contracts
because of the unsatisfactory nature of
the market which the Commission acknowledges.
In the meantime, however, in cooperation
with private interests, the Australian
Government intends to establish a uranium
milling plant which we expect will be producing
uranium oxide from 1978. By that time we
hope the market will be sufficiently mature for
the negotiation of new export contracts. We
shall ensure that our traditional trading partners
obtain an equitable share of the uranium we
have for export. This attitude has already been
explained to some of our partners, including
Japan, Italy and the Federal Republic of Germany.
And yesterday we discussed with the
Commission their needs for very substantial additional
supplies of uranium in the 1980' s,
none of which is covered by existing contracts.
The Commission supports, in principle, the
enrichment of part of their additional 
requirement in Australia and we look forward to
early talks on this total picture for co-operation
to our mutual advantage. We also stand ready
to discuss in full detail the Commission's
requirements for additional supplies of coal
which could treble the tonnage now being shipped
to Europe from Australia.
Experience in recent years reinforces the Australian
advocacy of international commodity
agreements. We continue to believe that such
agreements are an essential mechanism for
achieving predictable prices and supplies to
purchasers and predictable markets to suppliers.
We continue to seek such commodity
agreements in areas of vital interest to us such
as wheat and sugar. The supplies of both these
commodities are now subject to severe cyclical
strains which we believe international agreements
can mitigate. In those areas where international
agreements do not prove feasible, we
shall seek to negotiate long-term agreements
for agricultural commodities which will guarantee
supplies at fair prices. In these ways
Australia seeks to contribute to the long-term
stability of international commodity markets.
Partly in the context of our support for international
commodity agreements, Australia has
taken an active part in the formation of agreements
on bauxite and tin. We recognise recent
fears about the formation of resourceproducing
cartels. We believe, however, that
such international commodity agreements can
contribute to orderly marketing arrangements
and can be designed to balance the interests of
producers and consumers. We have been
particularly concerned to ensure that this balance
is maintained.
In recent years Australia has adopted a more
open and outgoing approach to international
trade. There has been a natural and permanent
shift in Australia's position, flowing from the
rapid expansion of our mineral exports and our
growing self-sufficiency in certain commodities,
particularly oil. It is true that in recent
months we have had to take measures, in
response to domestic unemployment, which
may be construed as a contrary trend. Nevertheless,
the net effect of our currency appreciation
and tariff reductions has been significant.
By the standards of our history. Australia has
moved into a new era of freedom and openness
in international economic policies. The more I consider the problems of the international
economic order, the morelI am convinced
that a retreat into economic isolationism is
no answer for us or any other nation. The temptation
to adopt an inward-looking and excessively
protective economic stance must be
resisted. Attempts to restrict trade further would
be self-defeating. In the longer term it would
result in a much worse situation for us all. I reiterate
our support for the OECD trade pledge of
May this year. The current world situation
makes it all the more important to ensure that
the forthcoming multi -lateral trade negotiations
are successful and provide the conditions for a
further boost to world trade. The nations of the
world must not allow their immediate problems
to detract from these negotiations, which in
themselves would be an expression of confidence
in the world economy.
In recent years Australia has developed a new
spirit of self-confidence and self-reliance. In
many of its policy decisions my Government has
reflected this development and, I believe, has
helped to shape and guide it. Our sense of
national independence has sharpened and
matured. One of the reasons for this has been
the entry of Britain into the Common Market.
We continue to hope that British membership
will encourage the Community to adopt a more
outward-looking approach to the international
economic scene. In the context of Britain's endeavour
to renegotiate the terms of its membership
of the community, the last thing Australia
is seeking is a restoration of her old-style pref
erential relationship with Britain. In the discussions
with the British on the possibility of arranging
a long-term agreement on the supply
of sugar two months ago, we made it clear that
any such arrangement would need to be made
with the Community or at least have the Coinmunity'sendorsement.
We have successfully
adjusted the pattern of our trade to take account
of British membership. The progress which
Australia had made in recent years in diversifying
its export markets, and the generally strong
demand in most world commodity markets over
the past two years, have considerably reduced
the immediate impact on Australia of the Community's
enlargement.
Our ability to overcome these transitional problems
has reinforced our self -confidence. We are
not concerned to turn back the clock. We regard 
any renegotiation of Britain's membership as a
matter for Britain and her European partners.
We will, however, continue to press our own
interests as effectively as we can. We will seek
amendments to those areas of Community policy,
including parts of the common agricultural
policy, which adversely affect Australia. We will
not be appealing to British sentiment but to the
interests of Britain and all her partners in the
Community. I am well aware that in political terms consumers
are not as well organised as producers.
Nevertheless, I would have thought that at a
time of high inflation European countries would
see advantages in seeking cheaper food.
Australia has a particularly efficient farming
community, and I stress the advantages to
Europe of allowing greater access to agricultural
imports. In multi-lateral trade negotiations
Australia will press her objective of reasonable
access to world markets for agricultural products
from countries like Australia. In determining
the concessions we will offer in these negotiations,
we will have one basic considerationthe
willingness of others to negotiate on primary
products. We were disappointed that the outcome
of the Kennedy Round was a concentration
on tariff reductions in the industrial sector.
It is our earnest hope that on this occasion
concessions on agriculture will move in parallel
with those in other areas.
This question cannot be separated from the
wish of European countries to obtain secure
supplies of materials, particularly energy
resources. I take one example of immediate and
pressing concern to Australia, the ban currently
imposed by the Community on imports of beef.
Australia, over some years, has made significant
investments specifically for the supply
of beef to Europe and Japan. Our confidence in
the security of future investments must be
affected by the abrupt manner in which Europe
and Japan have sought to shift the burden of
excessive beef supplies primarily to exporting
nations such as Australia. Are we now expected
to engage in further massive investment in coal,
for example, when our legitimate interests can
be treated with such disdain in other areas? We
are proceeding with our attempts to avoid
further market disruption in beef. We have
proposed that a consultative group be established
within GATT for this purpose and I am hopeful that the Community will lend its support
to this suggestion.
Another area in which there is heightened Australian
awareness of our national interest concerns
the role of overseas capital in our economy.
The extent of European investment in
Australia bears witness to the scope of fruitful
co-operation in this area. We believe that overseas
capital must continue to play a significant
role, in partnership with Australian capital, in
promoting our future economic growth. We
have, however, adopted a more selective approach
than hitherto towards such investment.
We have a firm policy objective of promoting
Australian ownership of our resources and
industries. When my Government took office
68 per cent of our energy resources were controlled
overseas. We could not allow such a
trend to continue. Our new investment policy.
while firm on this point, is being applied in a
pragmatic fashion with each case being considered
on its merits.
I referred at the outset to the problems of
developing countries. These nations have
suffered considerable deterioration in their
terms of trade during recent years. Their already
severe difficulties have become more acute.
Many of the matters on which I have already
touched are relevant in this context. The comments
I have made on Australia's development
of its mineral resources are in accord with the
interests of many developing nations. Many of
our partners in the International Bauxite Association
and those proposing the Association of
Iron Ore Exporting Nations are developing
countries. Australia's desire to broaden the
world's access -to agricultural markets and
stabilise those markets is of great importance to
developing nations. The multi-lateral trade
negotiations must make a special effort to accommodate
their needs.
Australia has a special interest and a special responsibility
in promoting the development of
countries in the Asian and Pacific region. We
welcome the steps which the European community
is taking to promote trade and aid with
our neighbours. In particular, I think of the contribution
made through the United Nations
Emergency Fund to those countries hardest hit
by the energy crisis, the declaration of intent for
Commonwealth Asian countries, the com-
munity's efforts to foster ties with ASEAN, as
well as the possible extension of your Association
arrangements to include, among others,
certain of our neighbours in the South Pacific.
I am glad that periodic consultations, either at
ministerial or senior official level, will be taking
place between Australia and the European
Commission. It is my firm hope that my present
visit to Europe, the consultations which will be
held with the Commission in future the specific
discussions of uranium and coal supplies and
the contacts we shall have with individual
member states of the community will enable
Australia to develop a firm, many-sided and cooperative
relationship with the new Europe.
We regard European economic and political
integration as one of the great historical forward
movements of this century. We see a strong
European Community as an essential pillar of
world-wide economic stability. In this context I
give an assurance that Australia will play its full
and proper role in the resolution of the world's
economic difficulties. 



Ireland Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in
his honour by the Taoiseach of Ireland, Mr Liam Cosgrave, in
Dublin on 23 December 1974
I am no stranger to your extraordinary and
beautiful country. This is my fourth visit to
Ireland. Each time I return I take renewed
pleasure from my contact with a country so
close in history and spirit to my own, and whose
valiant and poignant story has so stirred the
imagination of the Australian people. I was last
in Dublin as Leader of the Opposition in January
1972. 1 am the first Australian Prime Minister to
visit Ireland since Sir Robert Menzies was here
in 1941. Another visit was long overdue.
Before his sudden and untimely death I had anticipated
a meeting with your late President, the
distinguished Erskine Childers. With all Australians
I regretted the passing of so notable an
Irishman, whose appointment symbolised
something of the breadth and magnanimity of
the Irish character. I might say that the name
Childers is well known in Australia. One of the
late President's forbears, Hugh Childers, was
the founder of the University of Melbourne and
gave his name to the town of Childers in
Queensland. I reiterate the condolences expressed
by our Governor-General on behalf of
the Australian Government and people to the
late President's family and to the Government
and people of Ireland.
The Irish contribution to the settlement and
development of Australia is a familiar story. We
were the last major area of European colonisation,
and a distinctive Irish element is well
represented in the first wave of settlers to
Australia. Irish migrants helped to expand Australian
settlement outwards and inland beyond
the narrow limits of the eastern and central seaboard.
The development of colonial selfgovernment produced an unmistakable Irish
influence in Australia's emerging political tradition.
The major debates of the late nineteenth
century-debates which canvassed issues of
land tenure, education, the relations between
Church and State and the relationship with Britain-
rehearsed issues well known to the Irish
immigrant and enabled him to give Australian
political life a distinctively Irish flavour.
Times have changed since the first Irish
immigrants settled in Australia. Other European
communities-Italians, Germans, Greeks,
Yugoslavs-have made their contribution to
Australian life. Modern Australia is a pluralist
society. While we acknowledge our European
origins, and remain in many ways the most Irish
country outside Ireland, we are increasingly
aware of our geographical and political destiny
as part of the Asian and Pacific region.
Australia and Ireland are parliamentary
democracies with governmental, judicial and
social institutions derived largely from common
political traditions. The Australian High Court
has had many able judges of Irish extraction-
O'Connor, Higgins, McTiernan, Gavan Duffy.
There are still strong cultural affinities between
us. Yet our political and diplomatic contacts
have not always been as active or as comprehensive
as traditional associations might have
led us to expect. In large part this has reflected
simple considerations of geopolitics and
differences in our major international interests.
It has reflected the absence of serious problems
or conflicts between us. One of the ironies of
history is that conflict between nations is often
productive of greater mutual understanding in
Note The Prime Minister spoke informally and on occasions may have departed from this text. 
the longer term, while an established tradition
of friendship yields all too easily to a comfortable
and accepted pattern of relations which may be
less adaptable to the challenges posed by
changing times and fortunes.
In a period when Australia is seeking to play an
independent and increasingly active role in its
own region in Asia and the Pacific, at a time
when Ireland has perceived that her economic
and political interests lie in a united Europe, it
becomes more important to identify clearly the
real community of interest between us. We are
vulnerable, like all countries, to the threat of
economic and social dislocation posed by inflation,
rising unemployment and the spectre of
recession. We share similar commitments in a
wide range of international issues including
basic human rights, the problems of economic
development among the poorer nations, the
need for an accepted regime to ensure balanced
and proper methods of international maritime
law. We are both concerned with internal questions
of economic and social reform. We share a
common interest in formulating policies which
will guarantee an equitable local share in the
development of our national resources.
Perhaps most important, we realise that our
relations will come to be increasingly defined in
the context of the enlarged Europe of which
Ireland is a member. Australia places considerable
importance on its relations with the
European Community. The new Community is
Australia's largest export market after Japan
and the largest source of our imports.
It is responsible for some 40 per cent of the
world's trade. It is developing new relationships
with the trading nations outside Europe and
Australia is one of the most important of these
nations. Our commercial interests in Europe,
once centred on the British market through the
former preferential trading arrangements, have
changed to a new relationship with the Community
as a whole. Our mutual interests extend
further than a simple commercial relationship.
They include areas of international relations,
finance and questions of energy and resources.
It is against this background of common
interests that we shall be holding periodic
meetings between ourselves and the Commission
of the Community to enable consultations on the broad range of our mutual
interests. These consultations will permit both
the Community and Australia to co-ordinate the
various strands of our relations, ensuring that
proper recognition is given by each to the full
range of our interests.
The new multi-lateral relationship which we see
developing between ourselves and Europe
should not usurp the tradition of bilateral relations
between our two countries. It would be a
pity if our historical association was
overshadowed by the turn of events. With this
in mind the Australian Government has decided
to assist the University College, Dublin, to
establish a Chair of Australian History. We will
contribute $ 70,000 over the next five years
We have already made considerable donations
of books on Australian subjects to the college
and we shall make further contributions in the
future. I am confident that Australia and Ireland will
develop a new kind of relationship within the
the framework of Ireland's emerging multilateral
interests. Our relationship will be as
close, as special as before, but more relevant to
contemporary needs. Ireland is one of the two
English-speaking members of the Community
with whom we share a common cultural and
political heritage and powerful ties of sentiment
and kinship. As such we hope Ireland may
occupy a special position in the evolving relationship
between Australia and the new Europe.
I believe our relations will strengthen as we
move closer to our natural destinies in our
different regions of the world. 



The Netherlands
Speech by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, MrJoop den Uyl,
at a dinner given in honour of the
The Hagueon 4January 1975
The honour and the pleasure of receiving you in
the Netherlands, Mr Prime Minister, Mrs
Whitlam and our other distinguished Australian
guests, is due, no doubt, to the close relations
between our countries and co-operation in various
international fields. May I add that the
pleasure of receiving you at this very moment
has perhaps also something to do with the fact
that there are similarities in the situation of your
Government, Mr Prime Minister, and that of
mine. I am not referring to the fact that some people
have written to you in the past few months that
we had a crisis every week. And I will not suggest
that you are having the same experience.
But there are some resemblances in the situation
of your government and that of mine and I
will point those out later on.
Well, the relationship between our countries
goes back much further than the recent past. I
need not remind you of this. You all know the
Dutch discovered Tasmania, and well we know
you had at least discovered this country before
your present visit, and I am very happy about
that. Well, turning to the Australia of today, we
know that about 150,000 Netherlands
nationals have settled there since 1950, and
have forged even closer ties between us than in
the past. These Dutch immigrants face with you
the tremendous challenges of terrain, climate
and distance in the development of national
resources. If I am not mistaken we were the first
non-Commonwealth country to conclude an
immigration agreement with you. And to be
frank, I feel a little proud that most of my fellow
countrymen have succesfully adapted themselves
to their new surroundings. In fact-I
think-the greater part have adopted Australian Prime Minister of Australia in
citizenship. And, well, some people think that a
Dutchman begins to be a very noble man if he
stops being a Dutchman, so there must be every
hope for you, having so many Dutch people
naturalised as Australians today. I hope and
trust these people continue to be an asset to
both our countries. Important as this may be,
there is more to link our countries in the
present-day world, in spite of the physical distance
that separates us.
With the advent of regular air communications
shortly after the end of the second World War,
there have been numerous contacts during the
period when both our countries were undergoing
a fundamental economic, political and social
transformation. For all the gaps and misconceptions
that inevitably remain, we do know in this
country that Australia is no longer primarily an
exporter of agricultural produce and wool. And,
even, not only the country of kangaroos. We
know that, in addition to strengthening its position
as a supplier of raw materials, Australia has
developed a powerful and sophisticated industrial
base, able to hold its own with other leading
industrial nations.
Dutch enterprise and capital have had a part in
this development. We realise it has been a
modest part. Perhaps too modest. We would
welcome a greater participation in your economy
and this morning we have already discussed
ways to achieve that goal. Both our
countries have had to meet serious challenges.
Australia's outlook and interests were conditioned
by its ties with the British Commonwealth,
its vast geographical area and the
tremendous hardships encountered and overcome
in its initial development. The 33 
Netherlands outlook was conditioned by its
position as a geographically small but densely
populated country in Europe with extensive
overseas dominions. The very fact that we are
such a densely populated country may explain
for example why conservation policies, environ
mental pollution, our concern about scarcity of
national resources, our conviction that new
ways should be opened up in that field are so
much stressed in this country and in its policies
today. Looking to the future from our present postition,
we find ever increasing commercial and political
links within the European Community, of which
the Netherlands forms an intrinsic part. Yet
mental attitudes and world-wide economic
interests inherited from our recent past make us
pay special attention to the relations of Europe
to the outside world. We-I venture to say-we
can always be counted upon to oppose trends
that would make Europe into a closed entity,
turning a blind eye to the problems of others. Hence our special concern for developing countries,
but also for countries like Australia, which
feel that their interests are bound up with those
of the world community.
Both our countries are seeking today a new
social order in our domestic policies and in international
policies. The Government you lead,
Mr Prime Minister, came to power as a result of
the elections of-I believe it was-2 December
1 972. Well, that is something to be jealous of.-
You took over on 5 December. The Government
I represent in the Netherlands was a somewhat
delayed result of the elections of 29 November
1 972, three days before yours, but it took
nearly six months, it was 11 May, before I could
say: I have achieved the same results as you did
after three days. Well, what we might have in
common is a desire to reform and remould society,
but perhaps also a sense of instability.
You had to face the electorate again in May of
last year. I only had to face criticism in Parliament
and in the press but I watched you, you
The Prime Minister of the Netherlands, Mr den Uyl, presiding over talks in The Hague.
M' VC. a I
F . K7~ 7I
34 
are accustomed to peril like me. You have
brought about quite a few changes in the
foreign policy of Australia. You have embarked
on the work for a wider and genuinely represen
tative regional association. In the United
Nations you have adopted an attitude on ' apartheid'
in South Africa broadly in line with that of
Third World countries. You have speeded up
the process of national independence for Papua
New Guinea. The Australian Labor Government
has committed itself to an aid target of 0.7 per
cent of Australia's GNP in the coming decade.
Australia has joined with India, Sri Lanka and
other countries of the region in pressing for the
Indian Ocean to be declared a Nuclear Free
Zone. You have emphasised to the world that
there are Nations of the Pacific and that as such
they have a direct interest in the purpose for
which the ocean is used. You have recognised
the Chinese People's Republic and the North
Viet-Nam government.
In summing up all this, all these changes you
were striving for in foreign policy, I recognise
much of what the Government I represent is
striving for. And it is in many ways surprising to
discover that your Government-acting as it did
from December 72-and my Government acting
from May 73, have been striving to achieve
the same goals in international development.
The Dutch Government has committed itself to
a development aid target of 1.2 per cent of GNP
to be reached in 1976. We are conscious that it
is a very hard road, it is a very ambitious target,
but we think it is necessary to reach it, in our
position in Western Europe and in the world.
We seek to create a critical solidarity in crossing
the bridge between industrial and developing
countries. We want to be a critical member of
NATO, accepting our fundamental partnership
in the Western world and pressing at the same
time for common goals in co-operation with
non-aligned and Third World countries. We
know that there are limits to change. Limits to
change in foreign policy, too, and in the possibilities
of international co-operation. You, Mr
Prime Minister, have been working in political
life for more than a quarter of a century. You
were a Member of Parliament for twenty years
and people experienced in parliamentary life
know that policies of change can only be
realised within small margins. And for my part, I
think that that is political reality and we have to be aware of it. We in this country often speak
about the controversy between North and
South in the world, as being of no less importance
than the controversy between East and
West. It is a good thing ( for us) to know that in
the South there are Western countries-Australia,
New Zealand-which might contribute
substantially to overcoming that controversy
between North and South.
I might add a few words about what that might
mean in our present situation. Today a very
serious challenge faces us both. I am referring to
the energy crisis and the problems connected
with it. Both your country and mine are in a
relatively favourable position as regards energy
resources. But we do not propose to make use of
this position in a grasping, selfish way. It is our
conviction that no country can be permanently
prosperous in a world where the great majority
live in poverty and even in acute hardship. The
same principle of fair shares for all which guides
us within our national boundaries will guide us
in our efforts to lessen the gap in prosperity between
us and the developing countries. That is
why, whatever the difficulties facing us, we
shall not relax our efforts to contribute to the
development of the Third World.
Mr Prime Minister, we have worked closely
together as nations on numerous issues, in the
United Nations and in other international
organisations, with a view to creating conditions
for a better world for all humanity to live in.
When you return to your own country I should
like you to take back this message: There is a
country in Europe, far away across oceans and
continents, which looks upon the world much as
you do, which has stood by at the birth of your
nation and which values numerous precious ties
with it. A country, in short, which is and wants
to remain a friend: the Netherlands. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands in The Hague on
4 January 1975
I have had frequent occasion on my visit to
Europe to stress the traditional friendship that
Australia enjoys with the countries of Europe. In
few countries are such sentiments more
appropriate or more soundly based than here in
The Netherlands. I greet you, Prime Minister,
not only as a fellow Head of Government and as
the head of a fraternal party, but as the leader of
a nation with an exemplary record of generosity
and goodwill in her dealings with the world. In
few countries is there a keener and more practi
cal conception of the responsibilities of a small
or medium power towards the maintenance of a
stable world order.
The Netherlands has made a contribution to the
less fortunate peoples of the world and to the
welfare and progress of the international community
out of all proportion to her size. An Australian
Prime Minister comes to your country,
seeking not merely a reaffirmation of our bonds
of friendship, but a good example-indeed a
measure of inspiration-to guide us in our own
search for a wise and constructive role as an
independent nation in an increasingly troubled
world. In the history and traditions, and in the contemporary
circumstances of our countries, there is
much to provide a basis for greater co-operation
and understanding. Dutch navigators discovered
the Australian continent in the early
17th century-more than a century before the
British. True it was they found little to interest
them in those days. It was another 300 years
before the Dutch came to Australia in significant
numbers. Since World War II-a conflict in
which Dutch and Australian soldiers fought side
by side-more than 160,000 Dutch migrants
have settled in my country. Their contribution to
the development and enrichment of Australian
society has been immense and irreplaceable.
No migrants are more valued or respected by
the Australian people. Today, the populations of
our two countries and our national incomes are
almost identical. We are both great trading nations. With our common western traditions of
law, social justice and Parliamentary democracy,
we share similar ethical and cultural
values. Each of us aspires to a robust national
independence, to a distinctive voice in world
affairs, yet each of us acknowledges an important
role, and important responsibilities, in international
and regional communities.
I mention these things, not just to illustrate the
strength of our own relationship, which is longstanding
and secure, but to show how two
nations, geograpically remote and with widely
different regional interests, can demonstrate the
growing interdependence of all nations. I believe
this interdependence to be the cardinal
reality of modern international relations. Only
by recognising their interdependence will
nations overcome the complex and daunting
problems confronting us all. Interdependence
implies much more than co-existence, more
even than co-operation: it requires us to acknowledge
that no nation can live to itself, that
the world's problems are global in their nature
and origin, and that solutions will never be
found-they will indeed be made much more
difficult-if nations pursue narrow, inwardlooking
policies, whether in trade or in economic
matters, in military or defensive postures or in
their attitudes to the developing nations. There
has never been a greater need for international
discussion, for the exchange of views, for the
strengthening and enlargement of the world's
agencies for co-operation and consultation. The
survival of the western world-with its free
institutions and its manifold material blessings
-may well depend on the ability of nations to
talk and work together.
I believe this spirit of co-operation must be
sought through a new respect for international
law. It is appropriate that I mention these
thoughts in The Hague, for it is here in your city
that one of the paramount instruments for world
order and international law is based. Australia
has given her warm support to the principles 
and objectives of the International Court of
Justice. We believe we must continue to promote
the development of international law. We
must promote its acceptance, not merely as a
means of ending disputes, but as a standard for
international conduct, as a positive embodiment
of the principles of international justice
and human brotherhood. The re-ordering of
political and economic relations which is occurring
throughout the world will inevitably give
rise to strains between states. The challenge
facing us at present is to rise above self-interest
and accept with generosity, with grace and with
responsibility the need to resolve our
differences by peaceful means. It is for these
reasons that I spoke last year in the United
Nations General Assembly of the need to give
greater attention to the role of the International
Court. I urged that the Court's jurisdiction
should be widened and that jurisdiction should
become compulsory and universal. In helping
the Court to enhance its role, our countries share
much common ground. Our delegations at the
United Nations have worked closely together to
this end.
In international affairs, there have been many
other areas of fruitful co-operation between
Australia and the Netherlands. We both give
high priority to the United Nations. We have
effectively co-operated in the General Assembly
on such questions as non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament: Korea and South-East
Asia: the strengthening of the International
Atomic Energy Agency: the Law of the Sea and
the Environment. We have rejected apartheid
and worked for the elimination of racism and
colonialism, of anarchy and terrorism. We share
a similar outlook on the problems of the under-
The Prime Minister makes an address in The Hague. developed world. We are dedicated to the
independence and development of those countries
which history once made our colonies.
Australia's new emphasis in her foreign policy
on a more outward-looking and independent
role, our greater involvement in Asia and our
region, in no way represents any break with our
history or with our traditional friends and allies
in the Commonwealth, in Western Europe or
the United States. Nor has our vital interest in
their well-being diminished. Western Europe,
for example, is more important than ever in our
vision of the world. The nations of the European
Economic Community now constitute
Australia's second most important trading partner.
We believe a united Europe will strengthen
the democratic forces in the world, and that
Europe's continuing prosperity is essential to
the welfare and progress of all nations.
The Netherlands, as one of the founding states
of the European community, has an essential
and continuing role in the new Europe and in
Australia's relations with Europe. Your great
ports are the essential gateways for our trade
with the whole of this continent. Your businessmen
and investors are deeply involved in
Australia's economic development. Dutch
people have risen to the highest positions of
eminence in Australian commerce, industry
and public life. I think of G. D. Delprat, a former
manager of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company,
Australia's largest corporation, a man
who established our first steel works in Newcastle.
I think of G. J. Dusseldorp, founder of the
Lend Lease Corporation, one of the greatest
development companies in Australia. In this
context I mention a recent initiative to establish
an Australian-Netherlands Association in
Australia which will complement the successful
Netherlands' Australia Institute already established
in this country. I pay tribute to the efforts
to establish the new association and offer my
full support. It will symbolise and strengthen
the long-standing and cordial friendship between
our two countries. That friendship, Mr
Prime Minister, has been deepened and
enriched by my visit to your historic capital and
by our talks together. Australians attach the
highest importance to our good relations, and
honour your nation and its people for their contribution
to a saner, more civilised, more just
and peaceful world. 
The Prime Minister speaks at his official welcome to Paris at the Hotel de Ville. 



France Speech by the Prime Minister of France, M. Jacques Chirac, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Paris on
6 January 1975
Through one of those unexpected incidents
such as are often met in the lives of individuals
and peoples, the circumstances of these recent
days make your presence amongst us specially
significant. Indeed how could I fail to mention,
at the time when we have the honour and the
pleasure of welcoming you, the ordeal which
has just struck Australia? You were already in
Europe when you had to return to your country
and face the consequences of the Darwin disaster.
That you should have wanted against all
other considerations to keep to our joint plans,
that you should be in Paris today as previously
agreed, gives us an even better appreciation of
the importance of your visit to France and must
have consequences for our two nations and our
two States.
Our awareness that Australia and France have,
despite space and distance, very real common
interests-in many regards fundamentally
so-is further reinforced by a coincidence of
dates which is of symbolic value. We are in
January 1975: So it is exactly 60 years since
the first volunteers from the southern continent
first took part in the battles of the great conflict
which then divided the world. In the hardest
struggles at Vimy, as on the steep slopes of
Gallipoli, the Australian soldiers, with their heroism
which was to become legendary, bore witness
that to defend human liberty and the
independence of peoples, solidarity between
old Europe and their new country remained
essential. You may be sure, Mr Prime Minister, that the
French people have not forgotten. Sixty years
have gone by since those days in 1915 when
men of our two people discovered what a terrible price they had to pay for the right to retain
their identity. Another war tore our universe,
and your country, even more than in
1914-1918, experienced its dramas, bore its
effects and played its tragic part. Thirty years
ago, almost to the day, one of your predecessors
declared, so close was the threat: ' Australia
belongs to the Australians and it must remain
so. Neither you, nor we, have forgotten the lessons
of those years of anxiety. We know that peoples
must remain independent for men to be free.
We know that to remain independent peoples
must be capable of assuring their defence and
be determined to assure it. But we also know
that the will to remain independent and free
requires that men should also experience, in
their daily life, the value of independence and
the meaning of freedom. In modern industrial
societies this necessarily means that everything
must be done to provide everyone, whatever his
social or economic status, with a full share in
decisions, in choice and thus in responsibility.
We know, Mr Prime Minister, how well you
have perceived this. We know with what determination
you have laboured for Australia's
further evolution and to develop new forms of
economic action and social innovation.
Frenchmen are all the more attentive to your
efforts because for their part and in accordance
with conditions deriving from their own history,
they are pursuing with perseverance an undertaking
which is in many ways comparable to
yours, for French society to transform itself
without chaos and modernise itself without
breach. Tomorrow is not the contrary of today,
rather it is its development. 
The growth of your country is a fine example of
this. For nearly two centuries men from Europe
have established themselves on its soil, have
organised themselves there into a new society
which is neither a copy nor the reverse of the old
world which they had left. Australia has known
how not to be an antipodean Europe without at
the same time forgetting or neglecting anything
essential from the European heritage.
On that immense continent at the far end of the
Asian world, on the Indian ocean and the
Pacific, a new people has taken shape. Australia
has seen the development of a distinctive culture
and civilisation and become an industrial
power; its very geographic position as well as its
resources of raw materials confer on it a situation
of first importance in the world of today.
Europe, which is now in the process of constituting
itself, intends for its part to maintain in
the world affairs the position assigned to it by its
history and economic weight; to say this is to
say how much it is in the interest of our two
countries to draw closer together and to understand
each other better.
You could have with France a close dialogue an
even a special relationship. This is why to receive
you in Paris, Mr Prime Minister, is not only
an honour for us, it is also a responsibility, for we
must now determine what Australia and France
can henceforth do together. It seems to me that there is between our two
peoples, despite distance, a manifest propensity
to co-operate with each other and there are
elements within our two economies which are
so complementary that to fail to draw them
together would be to fly in the face of both logic
and the mutual interest of our countries. In the
industrial and scientific sectors vast fields could
be opened for close co-operation between our
firms, our scientists, our engineers; for a pooling
of our techniques and resources, our ambitions
and our capabilities. This can contribute to meet
the economic challenges of the last few years of
the millennium and to bring our two peoples
closer together. Our national interests command
us to place no limits on our imagination
and to defer no decisions.
I want you to know, Mr Prime Minister, that
there is on our side the political will, if you so
wish, to go a long way together. France wants to
be, before long, amongst Australia's principal
associates. Your stay in France is thus not only
the occasion to note that, despite all hazards,
our countries are close to one another in their
view of international life, of democracy and
social progress. It will enable us to give new
bases to our joint actions so as to reinforce between
Australia and France, between Australia
and Europe, ties which are not only those of
memory but those of a concerted effort for
growth, independence and peace.
Mr Whitlam talks to Madame Chirac. wife of the Prime Minister of France, at an official dinner in Paris. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of France in Paris on 6 January 1975
My wife and I are honoured by the welcome you
have given us. It typifies the cordiality and
graciousness we have come to expect from your
country and her people. No one who visits the
capitals of Europe-certainly no politician-can
escape the feeling that Paris is the high point of
his mission, that all his expectations, all his energies,
indeed all his anxieties, reach their
keenest pitch in the capital of France. In Paris
we renew our contacts with one of the great cities
of the world, with the capital of the French
Republic, with the city that uniquely symbolises
the spirit of Europe itself. Nowhere are the history
and culture of Western Europe so closely
and visibly identified with her present economic
and industrial power and her future political
aspirations. I declare Australia's firm support for the ideals of
the European Community and the promise it
holds for the peace of the world and the happiness
of mankind. Many nations have had a part
in shaping the European experiment, but
France is rightly seen, and will rightly be judged
by history, as the founding spirit and guiding
force in the movement for European unity. For
all her national pride and for all the intensity of
her national ambitions, France has put Europe
first. There have been times when Australia, in
pursuit of her own interests or in defence of her
traditional trading links and partnerships, may
sometimes have seemed reluctant to give her
full support to Europe. We have no such reservations
today. The Common Market is
Australia's second largest single trading
partner. We cannot ignore it; still less do we
under-estimate its importance as a force for
enlightenment, for universal prosperity and for
the general progress of humanity. The prosperity
of France and the prosperity of Europe are
indivisible. Equally, the prosperity of Europe
and the prosperity of the western world are
indivisible. Without the friendship and goodwill
of France, the friendship and goodwill of Europe
are an illusion. I would be less than frank, Prime Minister, if I
failed to acknowledge that Australia's relations
with France have been strained in recent years. I
would be equally lacking in sincerity and candour
if I apologised for the actions on Australia's
part which contributed to the difficulties between
us. You know the record of our
differences. I stress that the course we took
was not motivated by any hostility from our
people towards the people of France. Nor was it
inspired by any narrow political ideology: it was
in fact supported by all political parties in
Australia. It is sufficient to say now that the
main cause of our differences has been largely
removed, and I am bold enough to believe that
whatever France may have said of our attitudes
at the time, our policy would have won some
respect in a nation renowned for the vigilant defence
of her own national rights and interests. I
believe there are no longer any outstanding or
lasting problems between us. Here in your capital,
as the guest of your Government, as a long
standing friend and admirer of your country, I
proclaim Australia's desire and Australia's
readiness to strengthen and enlarge her relations
with France. We want to build on the great
traditions of friendship and co-operation that
have guided our relations in the past. I am confident
that we can do so. I believe, Prime Minister,
that you share my confidence.
It is a happy precedent, a happy omen, that the
traditional contacts between our countries-the
basis on which we must now build together-go
back to the very foundations of Australia. I hope
the French people will come to know more of
Australia's standing as a modern and highly
industrialised nation; a nation that has made,
like France, important contributions to art, to
industry, to science, to social organisation and
other fields of endeavour; a nation sharing with
France the historic Western values of liberty,
law and parliamentary democracy. Australians
are well aware of their historical and cultural
affinities with France. They are well aware of the 
vast reservoir of goodwill and shared experience
that exists between us, as former allies in war
and as great trading partners in peace.
I give two examples of the range of contacts between
us. An exhibition of Australian art has
lately been seen in Paris. Only four weeks ago,
in Canberra, I opened a French language school
and a new local headquarters of the Alliance
Francaise. These are small and recent things. I
mention others more important-for example,
the many discussions which Australians have
had with French officials of DATAR, from which
we have learnt much of value from French experience
in urban and regional planning. Or
again, the record of business contacts-on both
a corporate and personal level-between
Australia and France. On such foundations a
great structure of trade and economic investment
has been built. France buys annually
more than a billion francs worth of Australian
exports. French aircraft are the backbone of the
Royal Australian Air Force. The French construction
company, Citra, is responsible for
many works and projects in our cities. Renault
assembles cars in Australia. Yet even these
links, substantial as they are, fall short of
what our countries can achieve together. France has much to offer to our region, as she
has to the world at large. Australia has much to
offer France. We share, like every other country
in the Western world, difficult economic and
social problems. Your President, a statesman
fully seized of the gravity and complexity of the
problems of the modern world, stated his views
of few weeks ago in these sombre terms: ' The
world is unhappy. It is unhappy because it
doesn't know where it is going and because it
guesses that, if it knew, it would discover that it
was heading for disaster. It is an unhappy world
that statesmen have to lead and that the men of
the media have to enlighten'. I believe the cooperation
we seek between France and
Australia will make some contribution, perhaps
a useful contribution, to the easing of our problems.
May I say, Prime Minister, how much I
have valued the opportunity to talk with you.
We have renewed and strengthened the friendship
between France and Australia. I express
my firm hope, my unwavering confidence, that
our countries will move forward together in a
renewed spirit of trust into a new era of friendship
and accord.
The Prime Minister laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
P'. C i P 



Italy Speech by the President of the Council of Ministers, Professor Aldo
Moro, at a luncheon in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in
Romeon 8January 1975
Mr Prime Minister. In extending to you on behalf
of the Italian Government and on my own
behalf a most warm welcome, I want to tell you
how pleased I am about this meeting which
allows us to have a frank and cordial exchange
of views on various problems of common
interest.
I would like also to take the opportunity to express
to you once again the deep sympathy of
the Italian people for the disaster which only a
few days ago so gravely struck the city of Darwin,
prompting the unanimous and sincere sorrow
of the whole world.
Our discussions and the other meetings that
you will have on the occasion of this your first
official visit to our country fit into a pattern of
personal contacts between members of the
Governments of our two countries which has
become richer in recent years and which I sincerely
hope may continue to develop in the
future. I still remember well your preceding visits to
Italy, in other capacities but always with a
genuine friendship for our country and in continual
search for further points of contact and
dialogue. In our meetings, Mr Prime Minister, we have
been able to confirm the excellent state of the
relationship existing between Australia and
Italy and the proximity of our points of view on
many political and economic problems of the
present time. Above all we have been able to
ascertain with satisfaction that Australia and
Italy are united in the hope of increasing detente
and international political stability with the conviction
that only in this way can humanity reach higher levels of social progress in safe-guarding
the values of democracy and freedom.
It is exactly this identity of purpose which has
led our two countries to work together on numerous
occasions and to carry out a common
action in the United Nations and in the principal
international organisations where they have
been able to emphasise repeatedly the importance
of the ideals which our peoples share. At a
time like the present when the international
scene is troubled by so many serious problems,
a meaningful understanding between states
sharing particular affinities and common
interests acquires an, if possible, even greater
significance. I hope therefore, that our collaboration
on both the multi-lateral and bilateral
levels may become even deeper in the future.
The climate of trusting friendship between our
two countries has also a solid foundation in the
presence, in Australia, of an important Italian
community which constitutes a link between
our two peoples. This community represents a
fundamental element in our relationship which
deserves being carefully valued and watched.
On the bilateral level, I am pleased to underline
that the present good state of our economic and
commercial relations, notwithstanding some
difficulties connected, for example, with the
distance between our two countries, will be able
to develop even further in the furture. The
economies of Australia and Italy are in fact gen
erally complementary.
The sector where the co-operation between the
two countries can be especially advantageous is
that of energy, a sector in which only the concerted
effort and solidarity of all will allow us to 
face up the difficulties of the present time. In
this context, the contribution which Australia
can give to Italy, in the development of those
alternative sources of energy on which the
economic and social progress of our two peoples
will increasingly depend, assumes particular
importance. Mr Prime Minister, the desire to contribute to
the solution of the great problems of our time
which unites Australia and Italy also guarantees
the expansion of our relations and closer human
and cultural contacts between our two peoples.
The Prime Minister signs the Cultural Agreement between Italy and Australia with the Prime
Minister of Italy, Professor Moro. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in his
honour by the President of the Council of Ministers in Rome on
8 January 1975
It is a particular pleasure to be in Rome again. I
was here for a day in April 1973, but this is my
first official visit since becoming Prime Minister.
I am visiting a number of the EEC countries and
other European countries. The Community is
now Australia's second largest trading partner.
Europe, moreover, is the foundation of
Australia's cultural heritage. The advanced
state of European technology and culture make
it imperative for leaders to keep in touch with
events in Italy. It is therefore an important duty,
as well as a special pleasure, to be with you.
I doubt if there has ever been a time when consultation
and co-operation between national
leaders was more urgent or important. Australia
and Italy have great cultural and social traditions
in common: more significantly, we share
with all countries of the Western world great
social and economic problems. Inflation and
unemployment pose a grave and growing threat
to democratic values and social order and cohesion.
If Western nations are to solve these
problems without a recourse to authoritarianism
or without a relapse into anarchy, they will do so
only by restoring faith in the democratic system.
I believe it is time for governments, for politicians,
for all free political parties, to renew their
commitment to the forms and values of a democratic
society. There is no more urgent task for
modern statesmen than to lead, to inspire, to
nourish this commitment. The breakdown of
democracy in one country, attacks on democracy
in one country, must be recognised as an
attack on democracy everywhere. I believe the
leaders and peoples of Italy and Australia, two
nations with democratic systems, can play a
part in rebuilding the world's faith in the
flexibility and strength of democracy.
The Italian community is now the biggest of the
national groups in Australia. More than
380,000 Australian residents were born in
Italy, and Italians have had a profound impact
on Australia's way of life. Many of our major
developmental projects since the last war would have been impossible without Italian workers
and engineers. Your great state enterprises,
such as IRI and ENI, have been an example and
an inspiration to me and my Government in the
work we are doing. I mention one matter of
great interest to Italy-the sale of Australian
uranium. The Australian Government recognises
the importance of uranium to Italy. We will
ensure that Italy gets an equitable proportionalong
with our other major trading partners-of
the uranium we have to export.
I am grateful for the welcome you have given
me and for the valuable talks we are having
together. There are important bilateral issues
between our countries, but the most urgent and
enduring interests we have in common encompass
a wider field-a closely shared and
deeply felt commitment to the ideals of peace,
security and rising living standards for all
peoples. Perhaps we will come to see that
higher living standards do not necessarily
mean-and can no longer mean-more
material goods. For many nations, expectations
of greater prosperity of this kind have had to be
postponed. Whether they will be restored depends,
I believe, on the restoration of faith in the
democratic order, of confidence in our society
and in ourselves. For my part, I believe the
world will overcome its present problems. I am
confident that in the meantime the cultural, and
indeed the spiritual, traditions of Italy and her
people will help sustain mankind in its adjustment
to a new social order, to a new scale of
human values, that will be more just, more humane,
more generous and more selfless than
those we have known before. 
F-a -n T me 7
President Tito and Madame Tito welcome MrWhitlam. 



Yugoslavia Speech by the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, Mr Dzemal Bijedic, at a
dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on
9 January 1975
It gives me particular pleasure to have this opportunity
to greet in our midst, on behalf of the
Government and the peoples of Yugoslavia, and
in my own, the highly prominent statesman and
Prime Minister of friendly Australia, His Excellency
Mr Edward Gough Whitlam, Mrs Whitlam
and the distinguished members of his party,
and to wish them a sincere welcome and an enjoyable
stay in our country. We will endeavour,
at least partly, to reciprocate the hospitality extended
me and my associates during our visit to
the beautiful country of Australia.
I am confident that I also share your views in
saying, Mr Prime Minister, that our relations
have been developing ever more successfully
during the past years and that your visit will encourage
their further promotion, enrichment
with new forms and substance and extension to
new fields. We wish such a development of
relations and we will, on our part, exert efforts in
that direction. Yugoslavia has consistently
adhered to its policy of co-operation with all
states on the basis of respect for independence,
sovereignty, non-interference and mutual
interests. We are convinced that along these
bases it is possible to develop diversified and
long-term co-operation between our two
countries.
Your visit is taking place at a time when in many
quarters of the world, despite substantive
results achieved in the sphere of the policy of
relaxation of tensions and negotiation, the situation
is becoming more complicated, and is
seriously deteriorating. The danger of a new
outbreak of conflict in the Middle East is
imminent due to the persistent aggressive and
expansionist policy pursued by Israel, which constitutes a direct dramatic challenge to world
peace. For this reason it is vital for the international
community to exert efforts, as a matter
of utmost urgency, towards having the crisis in
the Middle East resolved on the basis of the sole
possible premises which, for that matter, have
been widely accepted: Israel's withdrawal from
all the occupied Arab territories and the full realisation
of the legitimate national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including the right to
establish a state of their own, a right enjoyed by
all the peoples in the world. In fact, this right has
received broad support during the past session
of the United Nations General Assembly. This is
the only possible way to achieve peace in this
part of the world on just and lasting foundations
and to ensure independence and security of all
the peoples and countries in the region.
As regards the Cyprus crisis, we are of the
opinion that the implementation of the resolution
of the United Nations-which was supported
by all member states of the United
Nations-constitutes the only basis for finding a
durable settlement acceptable to both ethnic
communities. The slow progress in solving the
Cyprus crisis and its persistence constitutes a
source of danger both for Cyprus proper and for
peace in the broader area.
In Viet-Nam, the Paris Agreements continue to
be violated by the Saigon regime. It is in the
interest of stability and peace to secure full and
strict implementation of the provisions of the
Paris Agreements and respect for the right of
the people of Viet-Nam to decide their own
future in sovereignty, freedom and independence. 
In the present-day ever more complex and
increasingly uncertain international situation,
the co-operation of all forces of progress, peace
and liberation is vital so as to consolidate and
render international relations more democratic,
to resolve outstanding international issues and
obtaining crises by giving substance to the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples toward freedom,
independence and establishment of equitable
international co-operation. It is only on
such premises that a durable and just peace for
all countries and peoples can be reached. The
non-aligned countries which, in co-operation
with other developing countries, have rendered
an invaluable contribution to such a development,
are willing to co-operate with all countries
and with all forces having identical goals.
The world-wide easing of tensions in specific
spheres of international relations is in the
interest of all countries. Detente, however, in
order to evolve into a world process and lead to a
genuine peace, must extend to all parts of the
world. Likewise, it is essential that all countries
should participate on an equal footing in the
resolution of international problems.
Mr Prime Minister, the special session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations has
demonstrated the necessity for establishing a
new economic order and equitable economic
relations in the world. The prevailing situation
clearly indicates the untenability of existing
economic relations in the world based on exploitation
of the majority of mankind, on
inequity and privileges of the developed countries.
All this testifies to the indispensability of
essential changes in the existing system along
the lines accepted by the entire international
community. The non-aligned and the developing
countries have offered a constructive program
pledging necessary changes while
respecting the interests of all countries and taking
into account the growing interdependence
in the world. Regrettably, all international factors
have not accepted the outstretched hand
and are attempting to preserve obsolete relations
and existing privileges through imposition
and confrontation.
We are following with keenest attention the activity
of your country and your personal endeavours
on the international scene. Yugoslavia
highly appreciates the constructive role which Australia is playing in the efforts to achieve assertion
of the principles of equitable cooperation,
and your contribution to the constructive
approach in dealing with international
problems, by recognising the new realities in
the world and the necessity of its continuous
change. We feel that these are sound bases for
our co-operation.
Dear Friend, the large number of Yugoslav emigrants
living in Australia, represents a special
link between Yugoslavia and Australia. They
have found in your country a home away from
home and, as loyal citizens of Australia, by
working diligently, are making their contribution
to its development and prosperity.
During our visit to Australia we were able to see
for ourselves that their work and role are held in
high esteem in Australian society, as well as
their contribution to the promotion of friendly
relations between our two countries.
It is no secret, however, that there are also extremist
elements who oppose such cooperation.
I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the Government of Yugoslavia values the
efforts by the Australian side which have been
made towards curbing fascist-terrorist activities
of small groups and individuals in the Australian
territory. We hope that these efforts will continue
and that they will be intensified as this terrorism
is directed not only against Yugoslavia,
but also against Yugoslav-Australian friendly
co-operation and all the democratic forces in
the world. As an expression of the past it constitutes
a vestige of the fascist forces which had
been condemned by the international community
and whose activity is a subject matter
being dealt with by the United Nations. Turning
ourselves towards the future, it is our wish to
build new bridges so that our mutual cooperation
may become even closer. I wish particularly
to emphasise that our migrants should
be a link of friendship and co-operation between
our countries. Our bilateral relations are
becoming increasingly comprehensive. However,
there still exist numerous unexploited
possibilities for their further and more meaningful
expansion both in the sphere of political and
scientific-technical and cultural co-operation.
In particular, in the economic co-operation
which is lagging far behind the real possibilities. 
In the prevailing conditions of an ever greater
interlinking in the world, every constructive and
fruitful co-operation between countries,
regardless of how distant they may be, constitutes
a positive and effective contribution to the
improvement of overall international relations. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia in Belgrade on
9 January 197
It gives me great satisfaction to come to
Yugoslavia and reciprocate the historic visit
which you, Mr Prime Minister, paid to Australia
in March 1 973. Your visit was the first to
Australia by a Prime Minister of Yugoslavia:
mine is the first by an Australian Prime Minister
to your country. Yet sixty years have passed
since our soldiers first fought together in World
War 1. Australia's involvement in the Balkans
led to one of the most significant military actions
in our history. Australians admire the proud tra
ditions of independence of the Yugoslav
peoples. We admire the heroism with which
you resisted great power domination in the First
World War and fascist aggression in the Second.
We admire the determination with which
you have continued to assert your independence
under the leadership of President Tito. I
salute your President as one of the outstanding
statesmen of our time-the builder, the inspira
tion, not only of a nation, but of a great world
movement for peace and human brotherhood.
Under his guidance, your country has become
an authentic symbol of the hopes of millions of
people in the developing world for peace,
progress and independence.
When my Government took office in December
1 972, it was faced with a world in which dramatic
changes in international relationships had
created not only new complexities in international
affairs, but also new opportunities and
challenges. At that time I stated: The change of
government provides a new opportunity for us
to reassess the whole range of Australian
foreign policies and attitudes. our thinking is
towards a more independent Australian stance
in international affairs and towards an Australia
which will be less militarily oriented and not
open to suggestions of racism: an Australia
which will enjoy a growing standing as a distinctive,
tolerant, co-operative and wellregarded
nation not only in the Asian and
Pacific region but in the world at large.
The basis of Australian policy remains the com mitment to independence, to the right of all
countries to manage their affairs in their own
way, without interference. It is because of this
commitment that Australia, while maintaining
its traditional friendships, has recognised the
need to develop its own contacts with all countries,
regardless of their political systems, and
take account of their views in formulating its
own policies. Independence does not mean the
assertion of purely national self-interest. In our
increasingly complex and interdependent
world, no state can seek to impose its own views
on others. With the right to independence and
equality goes the duty of international cooperation,
the duty to strive for the removal of
the causes of tension and conflict in all fields
and in all regions.
Perhaps no country has supported and practised
these principles more than Yugoslavia.
You have made an outstanding contribution to
international co-operation both in the United
Nations and elsewhere. Indeed there can be few
countries which, in their national Constitutions,
have committed themselves so firmly to the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
Yugoslavia's approach in international relations
seems to be best manifested in its commitment
to non-alignment, a concept which embodies
the principles of independence and international
co-operation: a concept which President
Tito was instrumental in formulating and in
which he remains the dynamic force.
There are encouraging signs that the world,
community is beginning to work for global solutions
to the problems of poverty, hunger,
economic deprivation and the threat of war. The
United Nations Sixth Special Session and the
World Food Conference demonstrated a
renewed international commitment to the problems
of the disadvantaged. This impetus
towards international co-operation, this retreat
from isolationism, must be sustained. Too often
in the past, opportunities for peaceful development
have been passed over by the inter-
national community. We have failed to grasp
opportunities to set the world on the path to
peace: We have failed to eliminate the threat of
war: we have failed to regulate the development
and proliferation of the instruments of war. The
threat posed by the production and proliferation
of nuclear weapons is the most awesome ever
posed to the future of mankind. The development
of measures to eliminate the threat of
nuclear war is therefore the most pressing issue
which confronts us.
The issues which symbolise the change in Australian
foreign policy under my Governmentand
the increasing similarity of approach between
Australia and Yugoslavia-are
colonialism and racism. It is my conviction that
the most significant historical trend since the
Second World War has been the struggle to end
imperialism, colonialism and racial discrimination.
One of my first actions after coming to
power was to instruct our representatives at the
United Nations to add Australia's voice to the
international condemnation of colonialism and
racism. We have supported all actions in the
United Nations against the illegal racist regime
in Rhodesia and against the infamous policy of
apartheid. Recently Australia voted in the
Security Council for the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations for its twentyeight-
year-long flouting of the most basic principles
of the Charter: we have joined the United
Nations Council on Namibia: reactivated our
membership of the United Nations Committee
of Twenty-four: and are providing assistance to
subject peoples in their fight for liberation.
In pursuing more independent policies, my
Government has sought to identify the common
interests which Australia shares with a broad
range of countries. Australia straddles many of
the categories which are often used to distinguish
countries-namely, the developed
from the developing, the rich from the poor, the
second from the third world, the producers from
the consumers, the aligned from the nonaligned.
Ours is a developed country, yet the
foundations of much of our prosperity on primary
production and the export of minerals has
made us conscious of the problems faced by
both producers and consumers. As a
predominantly European community in the
Asian and Pacific region, we are conscious of
the pressing requirements of our neighbours. As a comparatively rich country, we accept the
responsibility of extending asistance to the
developing countries. Bound by treaty to the
United States, we nonetheless respect and seek
to understand further the views of those
countries which have chosen to espouse nonalignment.
The bilateral relations between Australia and
Yugoslavia are strong and cordial. My visit will
help to strengthen them. Many migrants of
Yugoslav origin live in Australia. Their skills and
initiative have contributed to Australia's
progress and form an enduring bond between
our nations. I believe, Mr Prime Minister, that
after your visit to Australia you were satisfied
that my Government is determined to do all in
its power to prevent and punish criminal acts of
terrorism directed against Yugoslavia by a small
minority of malcontents and undesirables. You
may be assured that we will hold firmly to our
commitment. Trade between our countries is growing and
there is every sign that it will grow further. It is
my hope that we shall soon enter into long-term
agreements for increased trade. I hope to see a
greatly increased flow of private business,
officials and experts between our two countries.
Recent negotiations leading to the conclusion of
a bilateral civil aviation agreement covering
flights of your national airline to Australia and
ours to Belgrade is a positive contribution to this
goal. Negotiations for the conclusion of a
Cultural Agreement are well advanced.
The relationship between Australia and
Yugoslavia is based on an affinity of views on
the fundamentals of the international order. An
interdependent world demands co-operation
rather than confrontation: and no state, however
great, should threaten the independence of
another state, however small. These shared beliefs,
and the opportunities and demands presented
by a troubled world, form the basis of a
friendship that will be healthy and beneficial for
our two countries, and a constructive contribution
to the wider needs of peace and understanding
in the world. 
Speech by President Tito of Yugoslavia at a luncheon in honour of
the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on 10 January 1975
I would like to express the great pleasure, of my
wife, Jovanka, of myself and of all of us, to have
you all here as our guests today. You have come
from a far-away country geographically but one
close-by in terms of aspirations and outlook on
the world, in terms of efforts for the best possible
relations throughout the entire world, in
terms of eliminating, as soon as possible, the
various negative features which even today are
still burdening our world.
Many of our countrymen live in your country...
some arrived before the last war, and
others immediately after that war, but these are
two categories of people who differ in many ways. Those who originally left Yugoslavia to go
to your country did so because of economic
need, because they lived in great poverty. But
among those who went immediately after the
last war, there were those who were traitors,
who had collaborated with the occupiers and
committed terrible crimes-crimes you and
your people did not know about. Naturally these
two categories of our people who found a home
in your friendly country had to come into conflict
and to hate each other, to a situation which was
not in the interest of our two countries. I know
that you, personally, Mr Prime Minister, and
your Government, have done a great favour to
us by realising that it is not all the same who
The Prime Minister in talks in Belgrade with the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. Mr Bijedic
K." t 



Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given
in his honour by the President of Yugoslavia in Belgrade on
lOJanuary 1975
It is, indeed, a very great honor for us to have
been received here by you, to have talked with
you at such length and to have been shown
such hospitality and kindness. Our countries
have ties between them which reach back
across two full generations. We began our cooperation
back at the start of the World War I,
and this co-operation was continued later during
the course of World War II when Yugoslavia
represented the only country in the whole of
Europe which rebelled and fought against the
occupiers. You, Mr President, belong to a group of older
statesmen, distinguished men, who in their day
rebelled with determination and who, in the
end, won freedom for their people. This obligation
you took on has been understood by you
not just as an obligation to your people, but as
one to the whole of mankind because you are
among those who have demonstrated by your
example and your acts, and, in the end, proved,
the way in which freedom can be preserved and
must be defended.
Mr President, you have mentioned the hundreds
of thousands of Yugoslavs who today live
in Australia and you have also made note of certain
problems which, from time to time, have
come up in Australia itself and been the cause of
difficulties in relations between Yugoslavia and
Australia. These difficulties were created by just
one, very small, group of people who betrayed
their country during its most difficult moments,
and then came to make difficulties in the country
where they had chosen to make their homes.
However, I want to assure you that the majority
of Yugoslavs living in Australia today are very
solid citizens. They are proud of their earlier
homeland and they are loyal to their present
country. Of course, the largest group of people
in Australia's present-day population are of British
descent. Next are those of Italian descent,
and then, just behind, the Yugoslavs.
Because increasingly intensive relations and
co-operation exist between our two countries and because hundreds of thousands of your
people already live in Australia, I am convinced-
entirely sure-that all this must lead to
better understanding and the development of
better relations between our two countries.
Yugoslavia is a highly diversified country.
Different parts of your country were at different
times under the occupation of different powers
and countries. You have had different internal
administrations within the framework of the
country itself, and quite a few differences, likewise,
in cultures. However, I must state that
among the Yugoslavs living in Australia today a
pride and satisfaction is to be noted at belonging
to one unified Yugoslav community which was
achieved thanks to your leadership. 
comes from Yugoslavia, by realising that the activity
of those people who had done much harm
here must be thwarted, at least in your country
in order to provide peace for those who went to
work there honestly as citizens of Australia.
You have helped greatly to improve the situation
in this respect. It goes without saying, Mr
Prime Minister, that all those who emigrated
soon after the war are not negative, many
people wish to forget the past and to work
peacefully in your country. We have no objection
to such people. Today, too, some of our
people leave for your country. We put no obstacles
in anybody's way, each may go where
he wishes. These are Yugoslav citizens, honest
people, and I am convinced that they, in your
country too, will be equally good citizens, who
will work in the interest of their new homeland
-Australia. Many of them will return. You said,
a while ago. that some of these people have vacation
homes, small villas, on the Dalmatian
Coast, and I think this is very nice. Such people
are a bridge of friendship between our two
countries. I would like to take this opportunity to express
my satisfaction with the fact, also, that on many
international questions we hold identical views.
Our co-operation at the United Nations is very
good. I think that many more possibilities exist,
too, in other areas such as, let us say, the economic,
to expand our co-operation. We import
many raw materials from you, and Yugoslavia,
for its part, has many things that it can export to
your country. It would be a good thing for us to
export more, too, because the economies of our
two countries are complemetary and possibilities
really do exist for us to expand this cooperation.
Your visit to Yugoslavia, unfortunately, is very
short. Furthermore, the weather at present here
is not pleasant. Therefore, we hope that you will
come to Yugoslavia when it is more at its best,
warmer weather, and when you will be able to
see more, including the beauties of our Adriatic.
It is our hope, also, that as many as possible of
your citizens will come to Yugoslavia.
Yugoslavia today is a tourist country, very attractive
to many, and so it will be a pleasure for
us to have as many guests as possible from
friendly Australia. In ending, I would like, Dear
Friend, to emphasise once again how happy we are to have you with us today. I, myself, have
wanted to meet you, to see you, because I had
heard a great deal of the best about you, and I
know that you are a friend of our country, as are
your wife and associates. May I express the
hope, Dear Friend, and Mrs Whitlam, that you
will take the very best impressions with you
when you leave our country. Australia is known
in Yugoslavia as a friendly and progressive
country whose aspiration it is to build as good
and happy a life as possible where many people
from Yugoslavia are working and making their
contribution. 
Speech by President Tito of Yugoslavia at a luncheon in honour of
the Prime Minister of Australia in Belgrade on 10 January 1975
I would like to express the great pleasure, of my
wife, Jovanka, of myself and of all of us, to have
you all here as our guests today. You have come
from a far-away country geographically but one
close-by in terms of aspirations and outlook on
the world, in terms of efforts for the best possible
relations throughout the entire world, in
terms of eliminating, as soon as possible, the
various negative features which even today are
still burdening our world.
Many of our countrymen live in your country...
some arrived before the last war, and
others immediately after that war, but these are
two categories of people who differ in many ways. Those who originally left Yugoslavia to go
to your country did so because of economic
need, because they lived in great poverty. But
among those who went immediately after the
last war, there were those who were traitors,
who had collaborated with the occupiers and
committed terrible crimes-crimes you and
your people did not know about. Naturally these
two categories of our people who found a home
in your friendly country had to come into conflict
and to hate each other, to a situation which was
not in the interest of our two countries. I know
that you, personally, Mr Prime Minister, and
your Government, have done a great favour to
us by realising that it is not all the same who
The Prime Minister in talks in Belgrade with the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. Mr Bijedic 
national community. We have failed to grasp
opportunities to set the world on the path to
peace: We have failed to eliminate the threat of
war: we have failed to regulate the development
and proliferation of the instruments of war. The
threat posed by the production and proliferation
of nuclear weapons is the most awesome ever
posed to the future of mankind. The development
of measures to eliminate the threat of
nuclear war is therefore the most pressing issue
which confronts us.
The issues which symbolise the change in Australian
foreign policy under my Governmentand
the increasing similarity of approach between
Australia and Yugoslavia-are
colonialism and racism. It is my conviction that
the most significant historical trend since the
Second World War has been the struggle to end
imperialism, colonialism and racial discrimination.
One of my first actions after coming to
power was to instruct our representatives at the
United Nations to add Australia's voice to the
international condemnation of colonialism and
racism. We have supported all actions in the
United Nations against the illegal racist regime
in Rhodesia and against the infamous policy of
apartheid. Recently Australia voted in the
Security Council for the expulsion of South
Africa from the United Nations for its twentyeight-
year-long flouting of the most basic principles
of the Charter: we have joined the United
Nations Council on Namibia: reactivated our
membership of the United Nations Committee
of Twenty-four: and are providing assistance to
subject peoples in their fight for liberation.
In pursuing more independent policies, my
Government has sought to identify the common
interests which Australia shares with a broad
range of countries. Australia straddles many of
the categories which are often used to distinguish
countries-namely, the developed
from the developing, the rich from the poor, the
second from the third world, the producers from
the consumers, the aligned from the nonaligned.
Ours is a developed country, yet the
foundations of much of our prosperity on primary
production and the export of minerals has
made us conscious of the problems faced by
both producers and consumers. As a
predominantly European community in the
Asian and Pacific region, we are conscious of
the pressing requirements of our neighbours. As a comparatively rich country, we accept the
responsibility of extending asistance to the
developing countries. Bound by treaty to the
United States, we nonetheless respect and seek
to understand further the views of those
countries which have chosen to espouse nonalignment.
The bilateral relations between Australia and
Yugoslavia are strong and cordial. My visit will
help to strengthen them. Many migrants of
Yugoslav origin live in Australia. Their skills and
initiative have contributed to Australia's
progress and form an enduring bond between
our nations. I believe, Mr Prime Minister, that
after your visit to Australia you were satisfied
that my Government is determined to do all in
its power to prevent and punish criminal acts of
terrorism directed against Yugoslavia by a small
minority of malcontents and undesirables. You
may be assured that we will hold firmly to our
commitment. Trade between our countries is growing and
there is every sign that it will grow further. It is
my hope that we shall soon enter into long-term
agreements for increased trade. I hope to see a
greatly increased flow of private business,
officials and experts between our two countries.
Recent negotiations leading to the conclusion of
a bilateral civil aviation agreement covering
flights of your national airline to Australia and
ours to Belgrade is a positive contribution to this
goal. Negotiations for the conclusion of a
Cultural Agreement are well advanced.
The relationship between Australia and
Yugoslavia is based on an affinity of views on
the fundamentals of the international order. An
interdependent world demands co-operation
rather than confrontation: and no state, however
great, should threaten the independence of
another state, however small. These shared beliefs,
and the opportunities and demands presented
by a troubled world, form the basis of a
friendship that will be healthy and beneficial for
our two countries, and a constructive contribution
to the wider needs of peace and understanding
in the world. 



USSR Speech by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR,
Mr Aleksey Kosygin, at a dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of
Australia in Moscow on 14 January 1975
The official visit of Prime Minister Whitlam to
the Soviet Union and Soviet-Australian talks
which have begun in the Kremlin today are a
very signal event in relations between our
countries, not only because this is the first visit
by a Head of Government of Australia to the
Soviet Union in the history of our relations. This
visit culminates, as it were, the positive work
carried out to date in many areas of cooperation
between the Soviet Union and
Australia, and, on the other hand, enables both
countries to outline ways and means to raise
these relations to a higher level. The talks just
opened show that both sides have a desire to do
this. Regrettably, we cannot yet say that the history
of Soviet-Australian relations is rich in traditions.
I think the reason for this was not a lack
of interest in each other or of a real basis for
development of our relations. Anyway, as for
the Soviet Union, we have invariably shown
readiness to develop equitable and mutually
beneficial co-operation with Australia. I am not
of course saying this to recapitulate the past. It is
much more important that Soviet-Australian
relations today are marked by new positive tendencies
and shifts, which at the same time are a
significant feature of international relations in
general. Major changes are under way in the world.
There is an ever more active search for solutions
to problems facing not only individual countries
but all mankind. These are above all the problems
of war and peace, of improving international
relations on a just and democratic
basis. These are the problems of economic and
scientific-technical development and social progress, the solution of which is a key to a more
secure and better future for peoples.
It is possible to say with confidence today that
the world on the whole is evolving in a direction
encouraging for all champions of peace and
progress, and this consolidates the people's
faith in the future and in the possibility to make
life on earth worthy of man.
This is demonstrably shown by many facts. If
we take the sphere of international relations,
there are above all the current assertion of the
principles of peaceful co-existence of states
with different social systems, the emergence in
the world arena of many new states as active
members of international intercourse, the continuing
process of the relaxation of international
tensions and the development of peaceful cooperation
among states. There is also the overall
strengthening of the positions of those forces
which stand for the settlement of the historical
contest between different social systems on the
lines of peaceful co-existence, rather than on
military lines. The Soviet People has an extensive
plan of action in the field of domestic and
foreign policies, which we are consistently putting
into practice. It is the decisions of the 24th
Congress of our Party and the plenary meetings
of its Central Committee and the Congressendorsed
peace program, on whose basis we
build our relations with Australia as well. We are
working for the realisation of the aims of our
peace-loving foreign policy not by opposing
some states to others, but are striving to do
everything possible to join efforts in this direction
with as large a number of states as possible
which are also interested in strengthening
peace. This approach is clearly visible in the 
position of the Soviet Union on the questions of
enhancing security and co-operation in Europe,
in our proposals concerning collective security
in Asia and in many other foreign-policy initiatives
of our country, such as the holding of a
world disarmament conference. We stand for
making the process of detente irreversible and
safeguarding a lasting peace for all nations by
promoting broad and equal international cooperation
and by strengthening mutual understanding
and trust between states. ' Everything
possible should be done,' said General
Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
L. I. Brezhnev, ' to ensure that the peoples of the
world live free from war, live in security, cooperation
and intercourse with each other. Such
is the urgent call of our times.'
During the talks with the Australian Prime Minister
we intend to devote serious attention to the
questions of bilateral co-operation between the
two countries. I think that unutilised possibilities
and great reserves are available in many areas
of our relations-in economic, scientific, technical,
cultural and, last but not least, political-in
the matter of strengthening our co-operation in
the interests of peace and the security of
nations. It appears to us that the Soviet Union and
Australia can more effectively join efforts, in
particular, in solving such important international
problems as the ending of the arms
race, disarmament, the implementation of the
Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the total prohibition of all nuclear
weapon tests, the solution of the questions of
maritime law and a number of other problems.
The foundation for the further deepening of
Soviet-Australian co-operation in international
affairs is seen by us in that the Governments of
both countries adhere to close positions in
evaluating the significance of the relaxation of
international tension, in understanding the
need that detente should spread to all areas of
the world.
Both the Soviet Union and, obviously, Australia
are interested in peace and stability ensured in
Asia, too, particularly in those regions of the
continent where the situation continues to be
tense and fraught with war danger.
This concerns primarily the situation in the Middle
East. A just and lasting settlement in that region can be achieved only on the basis of the
Security Council and UN General Assembly
Resolutions, on the basis of the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories,
on the basis of the exercise of the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including their right to self-determination and
their own statehood, and the safeguarding of
the security and independence of all states in
the region. We believe that the way to a stable
political settlement there passes through the
earliest reconvening of the Geneva Middle-East
Peace Conference.
To ensure peace in Asia means also to bring to a
conclusion the political settlement in Indo-
China, to secure undeviating compliance with
the Paris Agreement on Viet-Nam by all parties
to it, to put an end to the armed provocaticns of
the Saigon regime against the Republic of
South Viet-Nam and to its attempts at undermining
the foundations of a political settlement.
The Soviet Union will continue doing everything
possible for the solution of the problems of
peace and security in Asia, just as, naturally,
elsewhere. At the same time, we respect the
proposals of other states aimed at attaining this
goal. We do justice to the foreign-policy sl: eps of
the Australian Government in support of the
process of easing tensions, and we are prepared
to develop co-operation with Australia in the
matter of ensuring international security on an
acceptable basis.
In recent years, the Soviet Union and Australia
have secured, through joint efforts, a certain
progress in the development of mutual economic
relations. We shall strive to make our trade
with Australia, our economic ties with it, stable
and long-term. For this, Australia's business
circles and Soviet foreign trade organisations
should know better the markets and possibilities
of each other; they should be able correctly
to appraise the prospects for the economic
development of our countries, their role in the
international division of labour not only today,
but also tomorrow. The great importance of this
is borne out, specifically, by the big shifts and
upheavals that have of late taken place in the
West in international trade and in economy as a
whole. Apparently, Australia with its natural resources,
great territory and possibilities in industry and 
agriculture will be acquiring a new importance it seems to us, testifies to a mutual aspiration to
in the world as one of the promising and big ensure success of Soviet-Australian talks and
participants in international economic co-give a new impetus to the further development
operation. And we would like to wish success in of Soviet-Australian co-operation.
this to the Australian people for whom the
Soviet people entertain the kindest sentiments.
We have always respected the people of
Australia, doing justice to their capacity for
work, persistence in overcoming difficulties,
and to their mastership of industrial and agricultural
production. Our people remember that
in the years of World War II we were bound by
ties of allied relations and that Australian soldiers
contributed to the rout of the fascist
enemy. The 30th anniversary of this victory will
be celebrated by the peoples and Governments
of the Soviet Union and Australia, in
strengthening peace as the objective basis on
which our countries can build and extend their
co-operation for the benefit of both peoples and
in the interests of peace and progress.
I would like to express satisfaction with the fact
that our talks with the Prime Minister and other
Australian statesmen began in an atmosphere
of mutual understanding and frankness which,
A march -past in honour of the Prime Minister at the War Cemetery in Leningrad. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a dinner given in his
honour by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR In
Moscow on 14 January 197
It is a great pleasure to be in Moscow as the first
Australian Prime Minister to visit the Soviet
Union. Australians admire the immense
achievements of the Soviet people in building
and rebuilding their great nation. As wartime
allies we admired the strength, the stamina, the
solidarity, the sheer courage of your people in
defending their motherland from fascist aggression.
In the past two days my party and I
have been vividly and poignantly reminded of
the heroism of your countrymen in the defence
of Leningrad, in the defence of Moscow, in the
defence of Volgagrad. No country has suffered
more in war, no country has fought in war with
greater valour, no country has survived the
devastation of war with greater strength and
resolution. I believe these experiences and
these great qualities have strengthened your
determination to work for a peaceful world.
Here in the Kremlin, here in this splendid hall, I
am nearing the end of a pattern of visits to the
major powers which I commenced shortly after I
became Prime Minister and which reflects the
independent and diversified foreign policy
which my government has proclaimed. Since
we came to office my Foreign Minister and I
have between us visited every continent. We
have visited the capitals of the five permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council.
This global context of our diplomacy is
important, first because we consider it necessary
to demonstrate to other governments and
leaders the important new directions of
Australia's policies. Secondly, the global context
is significant because I believe it is the
proper perspective in which to view our relations
with your Government. Your huge, diverse,
multi-national state occupies one-fifth of
the world's land surface, stretching from the
Baltic Sea to the North Pacific. The Soviet Union
is one of the world's two strongest powers. Our
policies acknowledge this fact. We recognise
that your interests, like your responsibilities, are
global. Australia believes that as a vigorous and forward
looking middle power, it is essential for us
to make what contribution we can tc the
strengthening of detente between the Soviet
Union and the United States. We must do more
than that. We must do our best to make dEtente
both irreversible and universal. As I said at the
United Nations General Assembly last September,
the Australian Government wAholeheartedly
endorses the progress towNards
detente which we have witnessed so far. We
recognise that detente is a continuing and a cooperative
endleavour. We would like to see it
widened to include relations between all the
major powers. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to
record in both capitals Australia's warm appreciation
of the progress made and cour encouragement
for further achievements.
I said this in Washington last October. I said it
today in Moscow, because in the final analysis
the peace of the world depends on Moscow and
Washington. Like other medium and smaller powers,
Australia welcomes detente, not oni' t for the
relative stability and freedom from fear which it
promises, but because it has helped create the
conditions in which middle powers like ourselves
can pursue more independent policies.
The old rigidities of the cold war have passed,
not least because so many ideological barriers
have been dismantled. My Government has
now established diplomatic relations With every
state geographically placed between the Soviet
Union and Australia. This is a mark of the new
realism in our policy. Just as we have diversified
our relations with the United Sates, so in
different ways we are diversifying our relations
with you.
Your country's military and indlus-irial might,
like that of the United States, places you in a
pre-eminent position to influence the future of
our planet. I have acknowledged the global 
extent of your interests. Such power, such
interests, bring with them great responsibilities.
Australia looks to the superpowers to maintain
the utmost mutual restraint in their relations
with each other and towards other nations. On
such restraint peace and progress ultimately
depend. We look to you for responsible leadership
and action to meet the urgent global problems
of human need and suffering. Thus we
hope, for example, that the Soviet Union and
the United States will co-operate in an adequate
international system of grain reserves to
alleviate the uncertainties and shortages of
supplies in world food resources.
The other great area of responsibility which
attaches to the great powers is the nuclear arms
race and the increasing risk of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I expressed Australia's
deep concern on these vital issues, and outlined
some positive steps which the international
community could take to meet these challenges,
in my address to the last session of the
United Nations General Assembly. Statements
by many other leaders reflected the same grave
apprehensions and concern. My Government
has declared its commitment to practical and
effective international disarmament measures.
We have ratified the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and subsequently concluded the Mandatory
Safeguards Agreement with the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Yet we observe some
flagging of international concern over the
consequences of nuclear proliferation. We are
disappointed by the lack of universal support in
our own and other regions for the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, which we consider the
essential foundation for a safer world. Perhaps
we have lived in the shadow of mutual destruction
for so long that we have become accustomed
to it. Can we dare to be complacent about
our very survival?
Since raising our concern for these issues at the
United Nations I have visited each of the three
depository powers of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. In Washington three months ago, in
London in December, and now here in Moscow.
I have made the same point. We look to the depository
states to maintain international interest
in the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to promote
and enlarge its membership. In this year of the
NPT Review Conference we see a special opportunity to revitalise the commitments undertaken
in this treaty, to strengthen the basis of
peace and awaken us from the nightmare of a
world in which nuclear weapons are widespread.
I was glad to note that in the historic
Vladivostok communique of 24 November,
Comrade Brezhnev and President Ford stressed
the importance of increasing the effectiveness
of the Treaty. We therefore look confidently to
the Soviet Union for constructive leadership on
this issue, not only by virtue of your special position
in relation to the Treaty, but because of
your important role as Co-Chairman of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament.
Mr President, I have spoken frankly on matters
of great consequence to us all. Nothing less
would have been appropriate to the dignity of
this unique occasion. Nothing less would adequately
have reflected the true nature of our
relations. These relations are now-though unhappily
they have not always been-characterised
by greater frankness, by greater realism,
by greater seriousness, by greater understanding.
My visit will serve to strengthen this understanding
and bring our peoples much closer
together. For example, I shall be signing agreements
between the Soviet Union and Australia
on science and technology and on cultural
exchanges. We have much to learn from you in
the scientific and technical fields, you I hope
may have something to learn from us. We
warmly welcome the prospect of a Cultural
Agreement between us. Australians deeply
respect and admire the culture of the Soviet
people-the glorious fruits of which I have seen
and heard at first hand during my present visit
to the Soviet Union.
In these and other ways we shall develop the
range of contacts between us. A world in which
states, regardless of their different social systems,
can communicate their views and
interests clearly and confidently is a world more
amenable to peaceful change and peaceable
policies. I regard the relations between our
countries as a constructive element in the creation
of such a world. I regard my visit to your
country, and the warm hospitality you have extended
to me and my party, as an important
contribution to the strengthening of friendship
between the Soviet and Australian peoples. 
Joint Communique issued at the conclusion of the visit by the Prime
Minister of Australia to the USSR on 16 January 1975
At the invitation of the Soviet Government the
Prime Minister of Australia, the Hon. E. G.
Whitlam, paid an official visit to the USSR from
12to 16 January 1975.
During his stay in the Soviet Union Mr Whitlam
and his party visited Moscow and Leningrad.
They had an opportunity to see how the Soviet
people live and work, as well as to acquaint
themselves with their achievements in the fields
of economics, science, education and culture.
The Prime Minister of Australia laid wreaths at
the Tomb of the Unknown Solider in Moscow
and at the Piskarovskoye Memorial Cemetery in
Leningrad. The Prime Minister and his party were everywhere
accorded a warm welcome and generous
hospitality. The Prime Minister of Australia, E. G. Whitlam,
was received by the Chairman of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, N. V. Podgorny.
In the talks which took place between the
Chairman of the Soviet of Ministers of the
USSR, A. N. Kosygin, the First Deputy Chairman
of the Soviet of Ministers, K. T. Mazurov
and the Prime Minister of Australia, E. G.
Whitlam, there took part:
On the Soviet side-the First Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, V. V. Kuznetsov;
the First Deputy Minister of Foreign
Trade of the USSR, M. R. Kuzmin; and other
officials. On the Australian side-the Special Minister
of State, the Hon. L. F. Bowen; the Ambassador
of Australia to the USSR, Sir
James Plimsoll; the Secretary of the Department
of Minerals and Energy, Sir Lenox
Hewitt; the Secretary of the Department of
Overseas Trade, Mr D. H. McKay; the
Deputy Secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs, Mr R. A. Woolcott; and the Deputy Secretary of the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr G. J. Yeend.
During the talks which were held in a businesslike
atmosphere and in a spirit of mutual understanding,
the parties had a constructive
exchange of opinions on major international
issues of mutual interest as well as on matters
concerning Soviet-Australian relations and the
prospects of their development.
Both sides noted that the positions of the Soviet
Union and Australia coincided or were close on
a number of important international problems.
They noted the significant developmenls which
had taken place in recent years towards
strengthening international peace and cooperation
and consolidating the spirit ol detente
in international relations.
Both sides agreed to make every effort ' o ensure
that relaxation of tension spread to all regions of
the world and that the steady progress towards
detente became irreversible.
Both parties noted the importance of the agreements
and arrangements concluded between
the USSR and the USA, directed at the further
improvement of the international climate and,
above all, the importance of the agreements on
the prevention of a nuclear war and the limitation
of strategic arms.
The Soviet Union and Australia note with satisfaction
the considerable advances towards
strengthening security and developing peaceful
co-operation in Europe and expres: s their hope
that the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe will be successfully
concluded in the near future.
The Soviet Union and Australia attach great
importance to strengthening peace and stability
in Asia and expressed their determination to
contribute in every possible way to relaxing
tensions further, to ensuring security and to
creating conditions for making Asia a continent 



Federal Republic of Germany
Speech by the President of the Federation of German Industry,
Dr Guenther Sohl, on the occasion of informal discussions with the
Prime Minister of Australia in Cologne on 16 January 1975
It is a special honour for me to welcome you, Mr
Prime Minister and the gentlemen of your team,
here at the House of German Industry.
As President of the Federation of German
Industry and on behalf of the representatives of
the German economy gathered together here,
I offer you a very warm welcome.
I wish to thank you for your readiness to undertake
this informal exchange of views, and in
order to leave as much time as possible for discussion
I shall confine myself to some brief
words of introduction.
Many of the gentlemen present in this circle
know your country at first-hand-as indeed I
myself do. The tremendous riches of the Australian
continent, above all in natural resources-
a most enviable asset in today's raw
material situation-is known in German economic
circles, and valued accordingly.
Developments in the past year have made it
clear to all of us that we must in future utilise our
available resources in a more careful and
rational manner than hitherto. The energy crisis
which co-incided with a scarcely controlled
bout of worldwide inflation and further aggravated
this phenomenon, has created problems
for the world economy which individual nations
can no longer master alone.
Australia is, admittedly, largely independent
from importing energy and other important raw
materials. At any rate it is less dependent than
most other industrial nations. But a collapse of
the existing world trading system with a retreat
into nationalism would hit the entire world
economy and call into question advantages already achieved through international cooperation.
If this is to be avoided, then in my
opinion only the co-operation of all nations participating
in the international economic process
can lead us out of the present situation.
A high degree of co-operation already exists
between Australia and the Federal Republic.
However, up to now this has been confined primarily
to an exchange of investment goods from
the Federal Republic against raw materials
which we obtain from Australia. Just last year
there was a marked expansion in German-
Australian trade. It is pleasing to note that both
our countries pursue a liberal foreign policy.
Free access to world markets is of vital importance
equally to Australia and to the Federal
Republic. In our own interest we should
endeavour to maintain and strenghten the system
of free world trade based on GATT.
Admittedly, the European action in banning
imports of beef, which affects Australia, is a blot
on the picture of free trade. I can as3ure you that
there is little support for this measure in the
German business community. At the same
time, however, German exporters are concerned
about certain tendencies in Australia to
protect some industrial sectors either by tariff
increases or, in some cases, by import restrictions
against foreign competition. From the experience
of German industry over the past decade
I can only say that a wider access for foreign
competitors is the best spur to the development
of domestic productive capacity.
But quite apart from an exchange of goods, a
closer co-operation between enterprises in
Australia, a country with such tremendous 
reserves of raw materials, and enterprises in the
Federal Republic, one of the large industrial
processors, offers itself as an eminently sensible
proposition. I am glad to say that connections
between Australian and German companies are
already numerous.
So far as I am informed, more than eighty German
companies are engaged in Australia to date
through direct investments.
The industrial interest in Australia led early in
1971 to the visit of a German economic delegation
to your country under the chairmanship
of my predecessor, the former President of the
BDI. This visit brought about a number of promising
new contracts. Even so, I have the impression
that the existing possibilities for German-
Australian co-operation above all in the sectors
of coal and iron ore, have not yet been utilised to
the extent that might be desirable. And certainly
the total engagement of German companies
in your country to the extent-up to
now-of about 275 million deutschmarks is not
as high as could be expected in terms of
Australia's importance.
There are several explanations for this. From the viewpoint of German companies, Australia's
distance from Europe and the delays and costs
of transport connected therewith, play an
important role: also the relative limitation of the
Australian market so far as the production of
manufactured goods is concerned.
The double-taxation agreement, which will
now come into force within a few weeks will
very likely improve conditions in this regard
since the absence of such an agreement has had
a disturbing effect in the past.
On the other hand, the uncertainty as regards
Australian investment policy has contributed to
the fact that German enterprises have hesitated
in recent years to invest in Australia. As regards
raw materials in the energy field, foreign investments
were completely excluded until
November 1974. The liberalisation decreed in
the meantime and the new rulings which are directed
more stongly towards joint projects, have
been welcomed by German industry. But even
now, there is still some uncertainty over here
regarding the freedom of action available to
foreign companies in the case of investments on
a longer term.
The Prime Minister in talks in Bonn with the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Mr Schmidt. 
Prior to engaging in investment abroad, a German
industrialist naturally desires to be able to
calculate on a fairly reliable basis the possibilities
and also the limitations for placement of his
capital and for making business decisions. This
is one of the pre-requisites for long-term planning,
and in the case of investments in basic
products, such as would be offering themselves
in Australia, it is indeed mainly a question of
long-term planning.
We would thus be grateful, Mr Prime Minister, if
you could explain in a few words what Australia
in her economic policy expects of foreign
investments in the natural resources and the
processing industry field.
We hope, Mr Prime Minister, that your visit to
Germany may contribute to a strengthening of
the good relations between our countries and to
the initiation of new links. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia on the occasion of
informal discussions with the President of the Federation of German
Industry in Cologne on 1 6 January 1 975
In large measure the economic relationship between
Australia and the Federal Republic
reflects the basic complementarity of our two
economies. Australia is a prosperous country
with a strong and technologically sophisticated
industrial base. On a per capita basis our gross
national product approximates yours. At the
same time Australia is in an unusual position
among industrial countries, for we are well
endowed with raw materials. By contrast the
Federal Republic is substantially dependent on
imported raw material. The pattern and growth
of the trade between our two countries and the
increased interest that you have shown in
investment in Australia clearly reflect this economic
complementarity.
The result has been a healthy growth in our
trade. Australia's exports to the Federal
Republic are increasing and are now valued at
over 700 million deutschmarks a year. The
principal items are raw materials and agricultural
commodities. Your exports to Australia
have been rising even more rapidly, now
amounting to over 1 1 20 million deutschmarks
a year. The major components are motor
vehicles, electro-technical products,
pharmaceuticals, plastics and chemicals. German
direct investment in Australia over the
years has amounted to around 260 million
deutschmarks and is increasing, I think you said
some other figure somewhat likely.
Let me say a few words about foreign investment.
We have become more selective in determining
which types of foreign investment are
welcome in Australia. This in no way amounts
to hostility to foreign capital as such. Indeed at
the moment there are very few restrictions at all
on worthwhile capital investment. We recognise
that Australia has a long-term need for
capital from abroad. Foreign investment has
undeniably made a significant contribution to
the rapid development Australia has enjoyed in
the past and will continue to do so in future. We
welcome your interest in investing in Australia and are happy to consider any proposals you
wish to make. We are convinced, however, that
we must promote Australian control of Australian
resources and industries and aim at the
highest possible level of Australian ownership.
When we social -democrats came to office two
years ago we found that foreign control extended
to some 26 per cent of the manufacturing
sector and at least 60 per cent in mining;
that is, the energy resources for instance and
mineral resources which held out so much hope
for Australia's future prosperity were in fact
predominantly controlled from overseas.
I'm sure you can understand that we considered
this an unsatisfactory situation. It was certainly
unsatisfactory to public opinion in Australia,
and I believe unsatisfactory to any Australian
Government which would ever be elected from
now on. We are committed to redressing this
situation, but I stress that whenever it may be
necessary to change a rule we shall do so
responsibly, fairly, with ample notice and with
due regard to the interests of all concerned. 11
would be irresponsible and disruptive to acd
otherwise. The promotion of Australian control oli
Australia's own resources and industries must
be viewed as a long-term objective. Our aim is
to rectify the situation in two ways:
( 1 We are trying to increase the already
high rate of capital accumulation iii
Australia itself. The extension of the
activities of the Australian Industry'
Development Corporation which was
established about four years ago by the
previous Australian Government and
the establishment of a national investment
fund should be seen in this light.
In screening more carefully proposals
for foreign investment we have in mind
a number of criteria: whether t[ he
investment will be in partnership with
Australian capital, the degree of foreign 
participation already existing in the
industry concerned, the importance in
terms of the national interest of Australian
control of the industry itself, the
size and location of the proposed project,
the extent to which a project uses
advanced technology for which
Australia has a need, marketing arrangements,
environmental aspects,
labour relations and the interests of
Australia's Aboriginal people. The last
matter concerns some mineral deposits
but not in general secondary inustry.
All foreign investment proposals will be considered
on their merits in terms of these criteria.
There are some cases in which I can specify
more closely what our attitude is likely to be.
Restrictions on foreign investment in some sectors
have been of long standing. This is the case
in banking, in radio and in television, and in civil
aviation. My Government has retained these
bans. We don't generally favour foreign investment
for the establishing of new insurance
companies and non-bank financial institutions.
Foreign investment in real estate will not normally
be approved other than investment which
is purely incidental to other purposes, such as
the establishment or extension of a factory.
This reflects an important principle in our policy,
that foreign capital should be associated with
productive investment adding to Australia's real
resources and bringing real additional benefits.
This is also the reason behind the legislation
dating back to September 1972, that is three
months before we were elected, designed to
control takeovers by foreign concerns of Australian
enterprises.
All these things have been there for years. We
haven't introduced them, although we haven't
altered them or criticised them. Since January
1973 my Government has assumed control of
all mineral exports. Now, this was not to stop
mineral exports as some people thought. You
work under a Federal Government, a Federal
System, so does Australia. And to control
exports was the only method open to the Federal
Government in Australia to achieve certain
other purposes. These purposes were to ensure
that export prices for Australian minerals are at
a reasonable level in relation to export prices of other countries and that in future the Government
has full knowledge of all details of export
contracts. I think it is clear that many of the contracts
which had been made before we were
elected to government were not very farsighted
indeed. And also it must be clear it was
astonishing that the Federal Government didn't
know the details of export contracts in Australia
and until we brought in these export controls we
were not able to find this information. And I
think also it must be said that in Australia many
of the States, the Laender, had competed
against each other for short-term objectives and
had not taken due regard to the overall national
long-term interest.
Now let me illustrate our approach by taking the
case of uranium: The era of cheap uranium has
ended. Some have thought equity participation
in Australia's energy is a means of guaranteeing
supplies. My Government has an objective of
full Australian ownership of this vital national
resource. The amount of uranium exported to
any country will not depend on whether that
country sponsors exploration in Australia. We
have constanty assured our trading partners
that they will receive supplies from our available
exports and I give this assurance again to you,
Gentlemen. Continuity of supply can be adequately
safeguarded through long-term contracts.
There were several contracts when we
came into office. We will see that every one of
these contracts is honoured in future.
In future the Australian Atomic Energy Commission
as the agent of the Australian Government
will participate in the mining and treatment
of uranium locations in the Northern Territory
of Australia. The Atomic Energy Commission
was established by an earlier Australian
Federal Government in 1953. There have been
no amendments to the Act since we came in.
And why I emphasise the Northern Territory is
that it is totally within Federal jurisdiction. The
Laender don't have anything to do with it and
most of the uranium in Australia so far discovered
has fortunately-we would regard itbeen
found in the Northern Territory. Now the
Commission will be the sole exporter of
uranium. It will also undertake all the new
uranium exploration in the Northern Territory.
Australia is making joint studies with Japan of
the enrichment of uranium in Australia. 
The world has been irreversibly altered by the
oil crisis which emerged in the last quarter of
1973. This has led to some discussion of the
role of other groups of countries exporting raw
materials. Some have banded together to seek
increased revenues for their exports. Australia
has participated in the development of some
mineral producer groups, such as the International
Bauxite Association. And in this last
week officials of our Government and the other
iron-ore exporting countries have been discussing
an iron-ore exporting association.
The Australian view is that such groups, while
different from the earlier international commodity
agreements, are not necessarily disruptive
and exploitative international resource cartels.
Though this dosen't apply to Australia, it is
worth remembering that many of the countries
concerned in the bauxite and copper cases for
instance, while rich in these raw materials, are
rich in virtually nothing else. They are developing
countries with an understandable concern
to receive reliable and fair returns for their
scarce resources. Clearly a balance must be
achieved between the interests of both groups
and a few countries who purchase the finished
product. I don't pretend this will always be
easy. I believe however that in achieving the
required balance countries like Australia have a
special role to play. Australia is one of the few
countries combining the interests of both sides
and therefore in a position to exercise a moderating
influence.
Finally a word about our tariff policy. Let me say
at the outset that international trade is of fundamental
importance to the Australian economy.
It would clearly not be in Australia's interest to
look upon trade as a one-way street. Our economy
requires a wide range of imported capital
goods and materials to maintain our expanding
manufacturing sector. My Government's attitude
to tariff policy is clearly flexible. In July
1973 we reduced practically all Australian
tariffs across the board by 25 per cent. Nevertheless
it must also be stressed that Australia
relies almost solely on the tariff to protect domestic
production. I need hardly add to a group
such as this that there are other countries or
economic groupings in the world today where
various devices, such as import prohibitions,
quotas and other quantitative controls are used
74 to supplement tariffs to protect local industries.
In view of this it is hardly surprising that in some
cases Australian tariffs are higher than in other
larger, longer established countries. This is not
intended to imply that all Australian tariffs will
always remain high. Our Industries Assistance
Commission is undertaking a tariff review which
will cover an appreciable segment of Australian
manufacturing industry and is expected to be
completed within four years.
A special feature of the Australian tariff system
is the provision for entry of goods either dutyfree
or at concessional rates under our by-law
procedures. This generally provides for concessional
entry for goods where Australian industry
cannot make available suitably equivalent
goods. In 1972-73, 25 percent of the value of
all goods imported into Australia was covered
by the by-law system. I'm sure many German
manufacturers were included in the list of those
benefiting from this procedure.
You will see that in all our policy Australia
remains flexible, co-operative and responsible
in her dealings with her trading partners. We
welcome the co-operation of German industry
and investment in the development of our
country and we trust that this partnership will
strengthen and develop. 



Speech by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany,
Mr Helmut Schmidt, at a dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of
Australia in Bonn on 17 January 1975
Three years ago I was a guest of your country
and I am therefore delighted to be able today to
reciprocate your hospitality in our little capital.
On that occasion in Australia I had talks with
you as the Leader of your Party. You were still in
opposition. We have had a number of talks in
the last decade, some in Bonn. Today it is gratifying
to renew and deepen our personal contacts,
this time in your capacity as Prime Minister
of Australia.
Your visit to some degree is overshadowed by
the catastrophe recently inflicted upon the
people and the town of Port Darwin. Allow me
once again to express my deep sympathy, Sir. Our two countries are separated by oceans and
continents, yet they are closely and firmly
linked by a network of relations and common
basic political concepts: internally a democratic
order based on the rule of law and a federal
structure, externally the political and economic
potential or our countries is aimed at international
division of labour and aimed at cooperation.
Under your leadership, Prime Minister,
Australia is making intensive efforts to help
resolve the world's political problems confronting
us. You set an example of the attitude that is
needed to secure humanity and justice in our
time by using our common sense and by appreciating
reality.
Mr Whitlam with Mr Scheel, the President of the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Your visit to our country comes at a time of
change. The old international economic order
has been called in question more and more. But
we must find a relationship between the industrialised
states and the countries of the third
world and as well between the raw material
countries, oil-exporting countries on the one
hand, the industrial countries on the other. Also
a new relationship between Europe and extra-
European countries like yours and like, for
instance, New Zealand, is to be established.*
And there is no mistaking the fact that nations in
their economic performance are becoming
increasingly interdependent. Nobody can secure
lasting advantages for himself or for his
own national economy by taking unilateral
measures or by embarking on mercantilistic
autonomous economic policies.
World economic problems are a central theme
of our talks today. I would feel that in this very
year of 1975 there is hardly any problem of
such overriding importance in terms of foreign
policy, in terms of world policy, as is the complex
of economic problems in which we find
ourselves entangled.
The main prerequisite for restoring stability and
achieving progress is, we feel, and I think I can
say this not only for the German Government
but also for the great mass of thinking people in
our country, irrespective of their political lean
ings, co-operation and partnership between the
industrialised countries; between the producers
and the consumers of oil, raw materials; between
the third world and the industrialised
world.
The past few months, I might as well say the
past few weeks, have shown that it is not
impossible to find a basis for common action.'
The danger of solutions to these problems being
found in unilateral protectionist measures
seems to be a little smaller now since everybody
has recognised the negative effect they will
have on the world economy and thereby on
national economies and on the individual.
Prime Minister, we have the impression that
Australia has seized the opportunity of the
present time and that Australia is making a contribution
both in the Pacific and also on a worldwide
basis which natural resources and the
achievements of its people permit it to make. We welcome in particular the contribution
which Australia is making in her own regions
towards the development of neighbours in need
of help in other Asian states. I also very warmly
welcome your effort in strengthening
European / Australian ties by your present tour
of the Old Continent, and, of course, we very
heartily welcome you on the soil of our country.
The history of your country enables you to
understand our European problems. I thank
you, Mr Prime Minister, for this understanding,
and I would like to endorse what you-at least
by the reports I have seen-seem to have said at
the beginning of the month here in Europe. You
are reported to have said you believed the West
would in general be much stronger, happier and
more successful if Western countries cooperated
with each other and that included cooperation
between-I dare say-Great Britain
and its neighbours on the Continent. In spite of
all strains the spirit of European co-operation
has so far withstood the tests.
We have found our way to pragmatic solutions
and have not capitulated in the face of problems.
We will continue to intensify our political
co-operation and proceed along the road to
European integration.
Prime Minister, we agree that the foreign policies
of our two countries have one overriding
aim, namely to safeguard peace. The Federal
Republic of Germany on her part will continue
the present policy of detente steadfastly and
consistently. This policy seems to us to be the
best way to achieve a stable peace in Europe
and throughout the world in which the German
people too can regain-even if we have a long
way to go-can attain or regain their unity in
free self-determination. Detente policies in the
multilateral sphere are a necessary supplement
to our bilateral efforts. We also know that the
political solidarity and the defence potential of
the West are indispensable prerequisites for any
process of detente. We appreciate your coming
here at a time of such crucial importance for
both world peace and the world economy. Your
visit marks an important phase of relations between
our two countries, and I am confident
that you take home the impression that
German -Australian co-operation continues to
develop on the basis of lasting friendship. 
Speech by the Prime Minister of Australia at a luncheon given in his
honour by the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany in
Bonn on 17 January 1975
I have been touched, Mr Chancellor, by the
warm welcome and the generous hospitality
you have extended to me and my party during
our stay in the Federal Republic. My visit to
Germany is the culmination of an extensive visit
I have made in recent weeks to several countries
of Europe. It is fitting that I should conclude my
European tour in the nation that best symbolises
two of the broad themes I have sought to
develop and explore. The first of these is
Australia's wish to strengthen her trade and
economic links with the European community.
This message has a special significance in Germany.
As the richest and most powerful nation
in Western Europe, you have a strong, and
perhaps decisive, voice in shaping the future
prosperity of Europe and the Western World.
My second theme has been the interdependence
of nations, the overriding need for cooperation
and understanding in solving our
common problems. No nation has set a better
example in this than Germany, a vigorous and
co-operative member of the European Community,
and the nation whose wise and farsighted
initiatives did much to set in train the
great movement of detente, on which depend
so much of the hopes of mankind for a better
and more peaceful world.
Germany, then, has a central and crucial role in
the shaping of a more rational world order. I
know you will accept the responsibilities for
which your great economic and industrial
strength have prepared you. The achievements
of the German people in rebuilding their nation
during the past thirty years have been an example,
an inspiration, to the world. I believe
Australia is well placed to work with you in
strengthening the economic foundations of the
Western Nations. We are both highly
developed, highly industrialised countries.
Australia is rich in resources and raw materials,
and I have been at pains to stress, during my
visit to Europe, our readiness to make these
resources available on fair terms to the nations
that need them. I repeat that assurance today. At the same time Australia needs Germany's
exports and manufactured goods to develop her
own industrial economy. We also need and
welcome your capital investment.
The interdependence of our two economies is a
source of strength to both of us. It is equally
important that we recognise and encourage the
same interdependence among all nations.
Economic co-operation must be thorough, it
must be universal, if the world is to overcome
the complex and daunting problems that confront
it. In every Western country I have visited
national leaders face the same problems of unemployment,
inflation, energy shortages, social
unrest and incipient recession. There has never
been a time when international consultations
and co-operation were more necessary. There
has never been a time when generosity and farsightedness
were more necessary There has
never been a time when it was more important
for nations to keep their nerve and keep their
faith in calm and rational solutions. It is a
crowded world. It is a complicated world. It is a
dangerous world. Nothing will be gained if
nations live for themselves. Nothing will be
gained by the wealthier nations-like Germany,
like Australia-if our policies on trade or
resources or foreign aid fail to take account of
the needs of less fortunate peoples.
In particular, I believe there is scope for greater
co-operation between producers and consumers
of raw materials to build a better framework
for the orderly and rational development of
production and trade. There is a greater need for
freer, more open trade policies among all
nations. Australia in the past two years has
sought to promote these conditions through her
own policies. We warmly and wholeheartedly
support the ideal of European unity and the
spirit of international co-operation embodied in
it. We applaud Germany's constructive and
creative role in Europe. We seek to be a partner
of a vigorous and outward-looking Europe-a
Europe with the widest possible membership, a 
Europe offering the widest and fullest access to
its total market.
During my visit to Europe I have sought the
understanding of Australia's friends for the new
independent role Australia is following in the
world. I believe we have a rather special and
fortunate place in international affairs. Relatively
remote from the scenes of historic rivalries
and conflicts, we are trying to see political questions
objectively, free from the passions of
alignment, though remaining loyal to our traditional
alliances and staunch in our friendships.
As major exporters of food, fibres and
minerals, we have much in common with the
developing countries. We share their concern to
secure a just return for producers and stable
terms of trade. We believe in the right of states
to sovereignty over their natural resources.
Yet, as an industrialised country, we understand
the needs of the exporter of manufactured
goods. We seek to play our full part in the main
tenance of international peace and security.
Like Germany we support the efforts of the
United Nations in the pursuit of justice and
world order. Guided in large measure by the
Federal Republic's contribution towards the
promotion of detente and the achievement of
peace in Central Europe, Australia will cooperate
towards the same end in the Indian
Ocean and in our region of South-East Asia.
Our common interest in peace and world security
is inseparable from our common interest in
stable economic growth and the rising prosperity
of all nations.
There are good reasons, Mr Chancellor, why
Australians and Germans are well fitted to work
together and develop their friendship. Our
countries are both federations. We understand
each other's problems of economic management,
of federal -state co-operation, of regional
development. Our bilateral trade is growing.
Australian manufacturers exhibit more and
more frequently in your remarkable trade fairs.
The already close links between German and
Australian industry will, I hope, be further
promoted by an agreement on co-operation in
science and technology. The flow of German
migrants to Australia continues, though at the
reduced level made necessary by the uncertainty
of employment. I pay tribute here in your
Federal Capital to the hundreds of thousands of German migrants who have helped to
strengthen and diversify our cultural traditions;
and develop our important industries. In recerN
years the Stuttgart Ballet has come to Australial
and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra has
played in German cities. We want to increase
the range and frequency of these cultural
exchanges. Mr Chancellor, my visit to Germany is only the
second which an Australian Prime Minister has
paid to the Federal Republic. Sir Robert Menzies
made a short, informal visit to your country in
19g59. Another visit was overdue. I am grateful
for the warmth and cordiality of our talks and for
the frank understandings we have reached
together. I have sought in recent weeks to dispel
the impression-a common impression in Australia-
that Europe no longer matters to
Australia, that our interests, our destiny, lie exclusively
in Asia and the nations to our north. All
I have seen and heard convinces me that
Australia's future and prosperity are
inseparable from yours. The Common Market is
our second largest trading partner. I shall leave
Germany knowing that our two countries can
make an important contribution together to the
solution of our problems and the strengthening
of our f riendsh ip.
I shall leave Europe convinced that Australia can
never turn aside from this ancient centre of
power and ideas, that with reason and goodwill-
and above all with peaceful co-operation
-the nations of the West will triumph over their
present difficulties and embark on a new phase
of progress and enlightenment. 111 16/ 75-L R74/ 1 589 



NOTES FOR A SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA, THEFON, E, G. 1ITLAM,
Q. C. IN REPLY TO A WELCOME BY THE BURGERMEISTER OF HAMPURG, SATURDAY,
18 JANUARY 1975
1. MY VISIT TO HAMBURG COMES AT THE END OF A LONG AND BUSY PROGRAM
IN EUROPE. I CAN THINK OF NO HAPPIER CONCLUSION TO MY VISIT THAN
A DAY SPENT IN YOUR CITY, THE TRADITIONAL ' GATEWAY TO FUROPE'
IS FOR ME A DEPARTURE GATE, NOT AN ENTRY GATE. TT WILL BE THE AST
MEMORY I CARRY WITH ME OF MY PRESENT JOURNEY, I THANK YOU, MR PURGERMEISTER,
AND THE SENATE FOR THE CORDIAL WELCOME YOU HAVE GIVEN TO ME AND MY WIFE,
2. THIS IS MY VISIT TO HAMBURG; MY WIFE'S SECOND, VF ARE DELIGHTED
TO BE AMONG PEOPLE WHO HAVE LEFT THEIR MARK INDELIBLY ON MY COUNTRY'S
HISTORY AND CULTURE, PY THE MIDDLE OF THE .1TH CENTURY, GERMAN
MERCHANTS, ESPECIALLY THOSE FROM HAMBURG, WERE WELL ENGAGED IN TRADE
WITH AUSTRALIA. HAMBURG CONSULATES WERE ESTABLISHED IN AUSTRALIA
IN THE 1.84I AND ONE OF THE FIRST GERMAN SHIPS TO VISIT " ELBOURNE BORE
THE NAME OF THE OLD HAMBURG MERCHANT FAMILY GODEFFROY. SINCE .1ø 4 MORE
THAN lT., ry GERMAN PEOPLE HAVE MIGRATED. TO AUSTRALIA. NE OF THE
EARLIEST GERMAN IMMIGRANTS WAS THE HAMBURG MATHEMATICIAN CARL LUDWIG RUMKER
THE FIRST GOVERNMENT ASTRONOMER OF NEW SOUTH ! ALES. PF DISCOVERED
IN THE SOUTHERN SKIES FOUR NEW COMETS, AND PREPARED A CATALOGUE OF
17, fln HEAVENLY BODIES BEFORE RETURNING HOME AS DIRECTOR OF THE PAMBURG
OBSERVATORY. 
-9-
3, QNE OF AUSTRALIA'S BEST KNOWN LANDSCAPE PAINTERS, FANS IHFYSEN,
WAS BORN IN HAMBURG. HE EMIGRATED TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A CHILD IN
1884. ANOTHER EARLY IMMIGRANT FROM HAMBURG WAS PERNARD HALTERMAN.
HE DISCOVERED THE WORLD'S LARGEST SPECIMEN OF RFEF GOLD, AND MORE
IMPORTANTLY HE WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR INTRODUCING GERMAN LAGFR PFER
TO AUSTRALIA. SUCCEEDING GENERATIONS OF AUSTRALIANS HAVE HONOURED
HIM AND HIS HOME CITY FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTION TO OUR NATIONAL LIFE.
4. HAMBURG HAS BEEN PROMINENT IN AUSTRALIA'S TRADE WITH THE FEDERAL
REPUBLIC. MANY GOODS FROM AUSTRALIA ENTER GERMANY THROUGH THE
PORT OF HAMBURG AND AN EVER INCRFASING PROPORTION OF YOUR EXPORTS
TO AUSTRALIA GO THROUGH THIS PORT. HAMBURG HANDLES APPROXIMATELY
PER CENT OF ALL AUSTRALIAN TRAFFIC THROUGH GERMAN PORTS,
SHIPPING AND SHIPBUILDING HAVE LONG BEEN SIGNIFICANT IN THE
ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN US. IN 1888 THE GERMAN-AUSTRALIA STEAMSHIP
COMPANY WAS FOUNDED', AND ITS SUCCESSOR, THE HAMBURG AMERICA I. INEo HAS
CONTINUED THE SERVICE TO THE PRESENT DAY, MANY OF THE CONTAINER SHIPS j
WHICH NOW PLY BETWEEN EUROPE AND AUSTRALIA, WERE BUILT IN HAMBURG
SHIPYARDS.
6. I KNOW OF HAMBURG'S LONG HISTORY OF FREEDOM AND INDEPENDENCE.
THE WORD ' FREE ' OCCURRED IN THE EARLIEST CHARTERS OFYJOUR CITY FROM
THE EMPEROR: RARBAROSSA, AND HAS CONTINUED TO THIS DAY IN THE TITLE
OF THE ' FREE AND HANSEATIC CITY THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE HAVE THIS
SAME FREE AND INDEPENDENT SPIRIT, LIKE YOU WE ATTACH GREAT IMPORTANCE
TO THE RESPONSIBILITIES WHICH FREEDOM PLACES ON OUR CITIZENS.
VOLUNTARY MUNICIPAL SERVICE WHICH I UNDERSTAND IS ONE OF HAMPURG'S
OLDEST TRADITIONS, IS A FEATURE OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE, 
7. MY WIFF AND I ARE MOST GRATEFUL FOR THE INVITATION TO VISIT YOUR
GREAT CITY AND FOR THE HOSPITALITY YOU HAVE SHOWN US, I LIFT
MY GLASS TO THE SENATE AND STATE OF PAMBURG AND INVITE YOU ALL TO
DRINK TO THE CONTINUING FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION BETWEEN OUR PEOPLES. 



Address to the Nation
by the Prime Ministeron 22 January 1975
I'm taking the earliest opportunity to report to
you on the mission abroad which I have just
completed in company with some principal
members of the Australian administration. This
was very much a representative mission because
of the complexity and diversity of the task
we undertook on Australia's behalf. So as well
as my colleague, Mr Lionel Bowen, the Special
Minister of State. I had with me the heads of the
Overseas Trade Department, the Minerals and
Energy Department and the Attorney-
General's Department and senior men of the
Prime Minister's Department, The Department
of Foreign Affairs and the Treasury. The composition
of the team itself indicates something of
the scope of our task.
The really remarkable thing about Australia's
relations with Europe for the past fifteen years
has been the relative lack-almost total absence-
of contact at the highest level. We visited
seven of the nine members of the European
Economic Community. The Common Market as
a whole is our second largest trading partnerafter
Japan. It buys-or refuses to buyagricultural
products as a unit; it acts as one on
our beef or our sugar. Yet we have never before
had head of government contact with the Community.
More than one and a half million Australians
have come to us from the countries we
have visited in Europe. Those countries have
been ignored by Australian Prime Ministers for
fifteen years. One of the countries-
Yugoslavia-is a founder and leader of the nonaligned
world-a significant grouping with
which every country around the Indian Ocean,
except South Africa, is associated. The Soviet
Union is one of the two super powers which
principally hold the fate of all of us in their hands. No Australian Prime Minister had visited
Yugoslavia or the Soviet Union or most of the
other countries visited by my mission; no Australian
Prime Minister had visited the rest since
the fifties.
Only a visit by the head of government enables
us to put our case, our views-to cover the
whole range of policy-as fully and forcefully as
possible. Only a visit by the head of government
compels the countries visited to clarify and coordinate
their own policies towards us. There
has been a decade and a half of mutual neglect
at this level. It was certainly time that we ended
that neglect-stopped taking each other for
granted-and this was very much the time to do
it.
The countries of Europe are among our chief
trading partners, most of them are in every
sense comparable countries. We share trade,
culture, standards and attitudes, technologyand
we share the same economic problems. It is
because we are a great trading nation, because,
like Europe, we are highly industrialised and
highly urbanised that we cannot insulate ourselves
from Europe's economic problems. There
is scarcely another country whose economy depends
more on the trade which passes through
its ports. Most Australians live in cities which
are trading ports. We cannot isolate ourselves
from the world and its problems and particularly
not from Europe and its problems. Economic
isolationism is not an option for Australia. The
impact of world problems is making its presence
in Australia. Australia must have her presence
felt in the world.
The overall result of my mission has been that
we have been able to present Australia's view 
thoroughly, comprehensively and authoritatively
on issues that matter in nations that matter.
I don't believe that any sensible Australian
who cares about our standing in the world, our
reputation, our interests, our influence, our
welfare, would question that this work is a crucial
part of the task of any Australian Prime Min
ister. Australia's economic strength-and this is just
the time when we should be concentrating on
our strengths-lies in our resources. It is a matter
of history that a great deal of these resources
fell under overseas control in the 1 960' s. There
is one resource that is still predominantly in
Australian hands-uranium. I found immense
interest amongst the industrial nations of
Europe in the purchase of Australian uranium,
and therefore, deep interest in the policy of the
Australian Government. I made it clear that we
are anxious to ensure that we are able to
develop our resources with the maximum Australian
ownership. A number of European coun
tries are keen to co-operate with us in the
uranium enrichment process as, of course, is
Japan. Australia's top officials have now been
with me to each of these countries. Our policies
ensure that very soon Australia will be earning
more from her energy resources than she ever
got from wool.
Everywhere I stressed Australia's support for
international co-operation in reducing world
tensions and for the exercise of restraint by the
great powers. I urged the widening and
strengthening of the great movement for
detente. I urged fuller and wider support for the
Nuclear Non -Proliferation Treaty which a
number of countries have yet to ratify. I urged
this course particularly in countries seeking to
buy our uranium. I stressed out belief-strongly
shared by the three Indian Ocean nations I visited-
that the Indian Ocean must not become a
scene of competition or confrontation between
the great powers.
I do want Australians to understand the
remarkable transformation in Australia's standing
and place and prestige in the past two years.
We are in the extraordinarily enviable situation
of having warm, meaningful, mature relations
with all the powers and groupings of relevance
to us. This has been achieved without damaging
old friendships. It has been achieved not by being all things to all men, but precisely because
we put our views clearly and firmly and
stood by them. This visit was necessary to com
plete the pattern-it was a crucial part of the
pattern of relationships we have built over the
last two years. Of course my reception abroad
was personally gratifying, but one just cannot
fail to be heartened by the warmth, the reality of
the interest and respect towards Australia. It
was, for instance, made very manifest again
and again when I resumed my visit after coming
home at the time of the Darwin disaster.
And, of course, the interest in Australia isn't
lessened by the fact that these countries, those
of them who share similar systems and economies,
are experiencing exactly the same
difficulties we are now passing through. Just
before I visited the EEC, the heads of government
of the nine member countries had met to
discuss together their economic problemsunemployment
and inflation-the very same
problems I discussed with seven of them separately.
With all the Western leaders I shared this
common concern. And always the underlying
theme was the recognition that the greatest
danger is loss of nerve on the part of leaders or
peoples. I am confident that the Australian
qualities universally admired abroad will
guarantee that there will be no breakdown here.
During the past five weeks the Parliament was
in recess; the Government certainly was not. It
has been active and alert and will continue to
be. The whole economic measures I announced
in November are now in operation, though the
effect won't show in the figures this month or
next month. We've got under active consideration
the whole range of options open to us, but
it needs cool, steady judgment. We will be applying
it in the weeks and months to come,
strengthened in the knowledge, confirmed by
my visit, that in no sense is Australia alone-not
alone in the diff iculties of the time and above all,
not alone in the world-a world where we enjoy
immense goodwill. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY,
TERRIGAL, 5-FEBRUARY 1975
It is only 18 months since we last met in Conference
at Surfers' Paradise. We set this time for the Conference in
the belilef that given the normal operation of our system,
given the normal rules of the game, we would-here be
preparing the program for our first election after the
victory of 1972. The fact that it hasn't worked out that way
is just one example of the extraordinary task imposed upon
the Party and upon the Australian Labor Government. We now
know that our opponents will tear up the rule-book and write
new rules whenever they think it suits them. Fortunately,
in May last year, they seriously misjudged the temper of the
people and the spirit of the Party. We can always look back
with great pride at the campaign of 1972. But the victory of
1974, in circumstances of enormous difficulty, was no less
a splendid achievement. The Party was aroused; its
determination, its purposeful anger about the-fraud being
attempted by our opponents3 carried us through and carried us
back into Government to continue to carry out the programa
three-' year program for which we have now twice been
elected. It's too easily said that 1974 was a bad year
for Labor. True, it was an extraordinarily difficult year,
but the fact remains that in circumstances of world-wide
difficulty, we won an election against great odds. For only
the second time in our history, we won a second consecutive
election. The war of nerves waged by our opponents continues
unrelenting. They no more accept the verdict of 1974 than
they did the verdict of 1972. So the pressures on the Partyon
our nerve, our resources, our organisation, our loyalty
remain tremendous. We need the crusading spirit of ' 72 and
the deep determination of ' 74 to carry us through 1975 and
far beyond. We've seen over the last two years how very rapidly
circumstances can change. In every sense they have been two
years of great change. Most of all, and best of all, there
have been the positive changes which we as a Labor Government
have made in the Australian ' society and in Australia's position
in the world. There have been rapid and unpredictable changes
in economic and political realities. In going about its
business Conference must bear this in mind. Our task here
is to draw up the conti-nuing program a program for the next
election and beyond. Our task is to revise the existing
platform and to make the platform even more relevant to the
future of Australia as we see it. We cannot be preoccupied
with one issue or one problem, and certainly not just this
week's or this month's most topical issue. We can't write
the platform in terms laid down by today's headlines. 9./ 2 
-2-
Of course, each conference reflects the mood
and need of the times. Throughout the period covered by
the three great conferences of 1967, 1969 and 1971 we were
always deeply concerned about Vietnam. Yet, crucial as
that issue was, if we had allowed ourselves as a Conference,
as a Party, to be completely preoccupied with it, if we
had not used those Conferences to transform the whole of
the platform, to revise and modernise it, we would not be
in Government today. Now, as always, Conference must build
for the-future. That is what makes great and memorable
Conferences. Conference and the whole Party should also bear
. this in mind when assessing the work of the Government and
judging our actions. There has been a great deal of talk
in recent weeks about reversing policy. Don't fall for
the line. We are not going into reverse; we are not
abandoning the program; we are not going back on the mandate.*
It's true we are going through times of great economic
change and economic uncertainty. All the mixed economies,
all the democracies, all our trading partners, all the
industrialised countries, are sharing the same experience.
From the time we cime in we've made economic decisions
relevant to the needs of the time and the problems of the
time.. It would of course be grossly irresponsible to refuse
to budge from a decision, correct enough in one set of
circumstances, when a completely different set of circumstances
* arose. Of course, we are adjusting; of course we are prepared
to adjust. But the underlying direction, the overriding
objective remains constant, unchanged, unchangeable to carry
out the program, to fulfil the mandate.
Jim Cairns has spoken here, and around Australia,
about the difficulties of economic management in a mixed
economy. It raises special difficulties for a democratic
socialist party. As Jim Cairns has said, we find ourselves
now in a position of seeking ways of restoring profitability.
We have to do that if we are to restore full employment.
I will have something more to say about this in
detail in relation to our particular economic problems and
unemployment and inflation. But don't let's forget that
we have always recognised the relationship between the prosperity
of the private sector and our ability to carry out the program.
We should not think there is something shameful or demeaning
about it. There is no sell-out involved. Indeed, in the
1972 Policy Speech, I laid particular stress on this the
relation between our ability to carry out the proqram and
the strength of . all sectors of the economy including the
private sector. I said: " Our program particularly in education,
welfare, hospitals and cities, can only work successfully
within the framework of strong uninterrupted growth." / 3 
We have to ensure those conditions of else abandon
the program. The fight against unemployment and the fight
for the program go hand-in-hand. Behind any temporary measures
and changes we have made and may make lies the great continuity
and the great consistency our determination to carry out
the program, the program based on the decisions of Conference,
the program twice put to the Australian people and twice
endorsed by them.
And what a mighty work it has been, and yet there
is still so much to do. Delegates will now have a copy of
the document called " Report 74" which sets out the achievements
in a single year. There's been only one year to rival it
for achievement 1973.'
I find there a re frequent complaints on two scores.
One is that we have done too much too soon. The-other is
that we have failed to communicate. As to the first, we have
to ask: which of our achievements all of them in pursuit
of the platform and in fulfillment of our pledges should we
have abandoned or deferred? We have, in fact, deferred some,
such as our schedule for the abolition of the means test, but
in everything we've done there has been a clear priority
the priority of greatest need. We have acted, urgently because
the need has been urgent. We couldn't have delayed in
rebuilding the ramshackle structures and systems we inherited.
We had to act urgently to clear away the accumulated deadwood
of 23 years, and we are doing so. Of course this upset the
vested interests, those who had it so good for so long.
And this gets to the second question communication.
The people whom our program is designed first and most to
benefit are not in general the most articulate, or the best
organised sections of the community. The interests and-. groups
who may feel disadvantaged or feel that their privileged
position is in some way threatened are of course, the most
articulate, influential and powerful sections of the community.
We can't really expect the press to take up the cudgels on
our behalf. The cudgels are thoroughly employed in bashing
us. And it is a myth that the Government has built up its
own vast propaganda machine this is just not true.
In the final analysis we will have to rely on
ourselves to get our message across. We do have in our ranks,
as members, as supporters, some of the most articulate people
in Australia. * We must not allow the media to, dictate the
terms of debate. We cannot sit back supinely. I It is time
to go on the offensive as we did in 1972. Of course it is
easier to attack from the advantage of opposition, particularly
an opposition as irresponsible as this present contemptible
rabble. / 4 
-4-
But the record of the achievement of our Government
is there. If we ourselves are apologetic about it or silent
about it, or if we fight just on the terms and issues laid
down by others then we have no chance of getting the essential
messg across. That's the real problem about communication.
The Labor program the program of this Government
is to ensure that the services and opportunities which the
community must provide are made more abuhdant and more equal
for all Australians wherever they live, wherever they choose
to live or wherever they are obliged to live.
I. don't expect to see in my time a total transformation
of the political and economic systems. I don't expect it to
occur in the lifetime of delegates here. But we can achieve
in our time the situation where anybody who has the will can
get a proper education to the limit of his ability, where
anybody who has the need can have the best medical attention
and hospital treatment, where anybody who has to live or
work in a city can have decent transport, a decent environment
and decent means df recreation.
Wages and salaries are becoming less and less the
dominant factor in determining a family's real welfare. No
longer is a person' s income the sole measure of the quality of
his life or the opportunities he can provide for his family.
They depend on things which the community acting as a whole
provides for its individual members, and which the community
alone can now adequately provide. Increasingly, a family's
standard of living is determined not so much by their income
but by where they live and by the community services provided
by the community in which they live. Their health, children's
education, opportunities and leisure, sense of security and
real security increasingly depend on the community's ability
or will to provide for them to provide for the needs 6f
individuals by collective decision and collective action.
Thes6 general thoughts are very relevant to any
consideration of unemployment and inflation. There is a
link between wages and inflation and there is a link between
inflation and unemployment. There are certain facts which
I'm bound . to state, not just as Prime Minister but as Leader
of the Labor Party, because they go to the heart of our
present problems. Don't let's have this childish accusation,
any time one of my colleagues or I state the facts, that we
are union-bashing. I will not mis-state the facts, over-state
them or under-! itate them. And the fact is that we cannot beat
inflation or unemploymfent if there are wage increases this
year on the scale of last year' s increases. I certainly
expect union officials and advocates to try their hardest
for their members. But the over-all task is to ensure
that gains are real and lasting. 
There must be a l * imit . to the increases of wages
which the economy can stand in any one year. Only so much
extra can be provided from the growth of the economy or
re-distribution from profits. Wage increases beyond such
limits must inevitably cause price increases and thus attempts
to improve the living standards by wage claims are frustrated.
I believe there is evidence that in recent times wage
increases have gone beyond the present limits of the capacity
of the economy to pay. We have a very rapid increase in the
share of GNP going to wages and salaries. Wage and salary
increases have been much greater than the rate of price increases.
I will give some examples. In our first: two years
of office, the Consumer Price Index increased by 31 percent.
Average weekly earnings increased by 40 per cent. Minimiumn
award rates for men increased by 47 per cent. Minim~ um award
rates for women increased by 70 per cent. With the taxc cuts
we brought into operation on the 1st January, real average
weekly earnings after tax have gone up by 7.5 per cent.
But its support for indexation, the Government
has indicated clearly its determination to protect the
real level of wages.
Australians should-be clear what the opposition's
attack on indexation means every wage earner would have
his living stan~ dard reduced.
And here again, let's be clear about the alternative.
Take Malcolm Fraser. He makes no secret either of his
ambitions or his intentions. You Might take notice of him
as Mr Snedden's rival and challenger. You might take notice
of him as Mr Snedden's appointee as Shadow Minister for Labour.
He has tried to sack Snedden but Snedden has not dared to
sack him, nor has he repudiated the industrial policy which
Mr Fraser unveiled in his speech to the ANZAAS Congress two
weeks ago. And there it is in all its horrendous detail
a promise of a return to the penal clauses, goal sentences
not just for officials but for erring members, a complete
wage freeze, an entire apparatus of union intimindation. There
is one great difference between Mr Snedden and Mr Fraser.
Mr Fraser is at least his own man. You will remember when
Mr Snedden was Minister for Labour he supported the idea of a
Prices Notification Tribunal. When he became Treasurer-he
opposed it. When he changed his advisers he changed his policies
and since he has been Leader of the Opposition the same
process continue! s different advisers, different policies.
Mr Fraser has at least come clean; employees now know exactly
what is in store for them, under any Government in which he
might have any say. ./ 6 
-6-
I do hope the Party and the Trade Unions will make
the connection between real living standards and the Government's
programs. Inflationary wage settlements this year would
threaten both real living standards and the program. And, of
course, we have to bear in mind the alternative. It has been
highly instructive to see the reaction of our opponents to
our curz'ent difficulties. They have shown themselves in
their true colours. Trendyism has had its little day. The
forces of the right have reasserted themselves with a vengeance
even Mr Hamer has dropped his trendy image so carefully and
expensively cultivated and hopped on the Petersen Bandwaggon.
For an example of sheer bloody-mindedness, what could excel
the Victorian challenge to the High Court on the validity of
the Australian Assistance Plan a pioneer experiment in
community involvement. If anything disposes of the idea that
the Liberals are concerned about so-called centralism, about
community involvement, it's that. The list of benefits
imperilled by this challenge is terrifying and goes far beyond
the Australian Assistance Plan.
It includes such matters as assistance for isolated
children, pre-school teacher education allowances,
Commonwealth Technical Scholarships, grants under the new
program for child care and pre-school education, national
apprenticeship schemes, grants to community agencies inolved
in migrant welfare, local aid for aboriqinas, grants fox
aborigine community development, protection of aboriginal
sacred site%, aborigiftal community enterprises, aged pc. 0z'
homes and hostels, sheltered employment assistance, handicapped
children's assistance, homeless persons' assistance, meals
on wheels, home nursing subsidies, nursing homes' ass' t nze
and many, many more. I am advised that in all, soMe 56
separate programs of assistance from the Australian Govw nment
not all of them the creation of our Governraent (. ould he
affected if the challenge were to succeed.
What on earth have these matters to do with t1
question of State rights or centralism? The degree of
misrepresentation on this question is astonishing. We oughtn't
to allow ourselves to succumb to it. We have had uhis
extraordinary spectacle of Mr Bjelke-Petersen and Sir Charles
Court descending on poor, beleagurered London breathing
fire against the Australian Govenment in general, and me in
particular. It is amazing how these super patriots, Mr Snedden
included, feel free to'denigrate and downgrade Adstralia abroad,
to foul the nest. Mr Bjelke-Petersen alleges that I set out
in London to abolish the Agents-General. Whatever I might
think about the anachronism and pretension of Agents-General,
I have never raised the issue. / 7 
-7-
The only time I have been asked to raise any matter
concerning the Agents-General was by themselves in 1969. They
had a terrible problem and petitioned me in London to help
them. They were terribly upset by their low rating at official
functions. Under the order of precedence they lay somewhere
under the Mayor of Manchester and just on top of the Dame of Sark.
So you see the weighty problems that the Agents-General have
to deal-with. But I have not raised the issue. The only matter
I have raised with the British Government is the question of
Appeals to the Privy Council that the Australian High Court
would be the final Court of Appeal. This does not involve any
question of State rights, because in matters between the States
and the national Government, the High Court is the final
court of Appeal. It should be so for all matters. It is what
I believe I am sure it is what most Australians believe and
in particular it is what the platform says.
In London I did, however, say in a public speech
in very general terms something about the responsibilities of
the national Government and the State Governmen * ts. I pointed
out that in the two Australian States with the largest
populations it was obvious that only through the involvement
of the national Govenment could the people be provided with
essential public services like health, public transport and
education. In the States with-the largest areas, only the
national Government could safeguard a control of the vast
new natural resources discovered in the last 10 years.
Later this year we will be concluding a new
five year financial agreement with the States. I should stress
this: no reimbursement formula would solve the financial
difficulties of the States as permanently and successfully
as acceptance by the National Government of responsibility
for hospitals and railways. It is not enough to say thdt
because these are traditionally fields for the States, nothing
can be done. Where would our universities be if we had
accepted the traditional argument?
And of course, over the whole range of policy,
the traditionalist argument is one that should not wash with
our Party the Party of change, the Party of reform. It
has been by-breaking with tradition, by seeking new methods
that we have been able to achieve so much in so short a time.
We shall go from this Conference with our program
refreshed and I believe, with our determination refreshed.
I don't disguise the difficulties. The real difficulty is
purely political this notion that an election may be held
every 6 months at the whim of half the Senate. The opposition
is characterised by an extraordinary combination of irresponsibility
and arrogance. Mr Snedden talks as though it were his
prerogative to decide when the next election may be. That is
a fantastic assumption for any Leader of the opposition, but
doubly fantastic for this one a man with the shakiest hold
on the leadership of his own party, a man who cannot commit
his own Senators, on this issue or any other. 
-8-
He cannot commit them to bad conduct or compel
them to good conduct. The Parliamentarv system everywhere
is being challenged as never before. The irresponsibility
of the Opposition injects a new poison, a further uncertainty
into the Australian system. For our part, we are determined
to' work on the basic assumption of elections that in 1974
the people elected us for a further three years and we have
a mandate to carry out our program during the full term for
which we were elected.
Any other approach would. be to succumb to the
tactics and the propaganda of our opponents. We should not
get unnerved about difficulties. Politics is by its nature
a difficult business. None know it better than we in
this room. We did not get an armchair ride into office
and we could not have expected an armchair ride once we were
in office. Government is about solving problems. Because
these are always human problems, they'don't lend themselves
to perfect, complete solutions. Difficulty is the name of
the game. Don't be fazed; don't be panicked. The people
of Australia placef a high privilege upon us. It is a great
honour to have been twice entrusted with the conduct of
their affairs. I am confident we shall emerge from this Conference
further strengthened in our ability to carry out that trust. 



SPFFCII BY iIIF PRIME MINISTR,
T 1l i 1. FEI -G1 . iiI TlIAM, .1oC.. I, Po.
FOR THE OPENING OF TIHE NEPFAN DIT I PICT
AGRICULTURAL, ! iORTICUIIITIIHRALA ND INDIISTRIAI. . IITY'S
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW,
PENRITII, 1 FEBRUARY 1975
I HOPE NO ONE WILL ACCUSE ME OF JUNKETING IF I
POINT OUT THAT THIS IS MY SECOND VISIT TO PENRITH IN THE
PAST FIVE MONTHS. I HAD THE PLEASURE OF OPENING A T. V.
FACTORY HERE LAST SEPTEMBER; NOW I AM OPENING YOUR
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW. AND IT IS HERE IN THIS COMBINATION
OF LOCAL ACTIVITY OF PRIMARY PRODUCTION AND VIGOROUS
SECONDARY INDUSTRY THAT WE FIND THE GREAT STRENGTH AND
DIVERSITY OF YOUR CITY AND YOUR REGION.
PENRITH IS THE CENTRE OF A THRIVING AND PROSPEROUS
COMMUNITY RICH IN HISTORY, RICH ' IN NATURAL BEAUTY, RICH
IN NATURAL RESOURCES. IN YOUR ANNUAL SHOW WE SEE
BOUNTIFUL EVIDENCE OF YOUR RURAL PROSPERITY. IT IS
HEARTENING TO COME TO YOUR DISTRICT AND SENSE THE CONFIDENT
AND INDUSTRIOUS SPIRIT OF THE PEOPLE OF THE NEPEAN. OUR,
COUNTRY FACES PROBLEMS AS YOU ALL KNOW, BUT SO LONG AS THERE
ARE DISTRICTS LIKE YOURSAND SHOWS LIKE YOURS WE CAN BE
CERTAIN OUR PROBLEMS WILL BE BEATEN. THEY WILL BE BEATEN BY
A STURDY, CONFIDENT PEOPLE, WITH FAITH I. N THEMSELVES,
FAITH IN THEIR ABILITY TO PRODUCE THE GOODS WE NEED, FAITH
IN THE VAST NATURAL RESOURCES OF OUR COUNTRY, FAITH IN THE
BASIC STRENGTH OF OUR ECONOMY, FAITH IN A STRONG DEMOCRATIC
SYSTEM AT ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT A SYSTEM WE MUST STRIVE
TO PRESERVE. 
HERE IN PENRITH, IN THE NEPEAN DISTRICT, YOU ARE
. BUILDING UP THE STRENGTH AND RICHES OF OUR NATION. YOU ARE
MAKING A BETTER LIFE FOR AUSTRALIANS EVERYWHERE, AND THE
GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO MAKE A BETTER LIFE FOR YOU,
FOR THE FARMERS AND THE TOWNSPEOPLE IN OUR RURAL COMMUNITIES.
YOU HEAR A LOT ABOUT OUR WORK FOR THE-CITIES; YOU DON'T
HEAR SO MUCH ABOUT OUR WORK FOR THE COUNTRY TOWNS. THE
PURPOSE OF SO MANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES -OUR
GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, OUT. AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS,
OUR CONTRIBUTIONS TO SPORT AND RECREATION, TO MENTION A
FEW IS TO MAKE LIFE IN COUNTRY TOWNS AS REWARDING, AS
PROSPEROUS, AS SATISFYING AS' LIFE IN THE MAJOR CITIES.
PENRITH IS TYPICAL OF THE CENTRES BENEFITING FROM
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICIES FOR ASSISTING LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT. AS A DIRECT RESULT
OF OUR MEASUR~ ES MORE THAN $ 1,100,00 HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TO
ASSIST YOUR CITY'IS GROWTH AND RAISE THE STANDARD OF COMMUNIT?,*
SERVICES IN THE AREA. IN ADDITION, THE PEOPLE OF PENRITH
AND THE NEPEAN DISTRICT WILL BENEFIT FROM OUR ASSISTANCE
TO SCHOOLS, HEALTH SERVICES, ROADS, TRANSPORT.. DON'T OET
THE IDEA THAT THESE MAJOR GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS ARE FOR
CITY PEOPLE ONLY. OUR POLICIES ARE DESIGNED TO BENEFIT ALL
AUSTRALIANS, WHEREVER THEY LIVE, WHEREVER AND HOWE VER THEY
WORK. WE HAVE LONG BEEN AWARE OF THE-INADEQUACIES OF'OUR
CITIES. RECENTLY, IN THE INTERIM REPORT OF T-HE COMMISSION
OF INQUIRY INTO POVERTY WE HAVE* HAD STARK EVIDENCE OF POVERTY
AND DEPRIVATION IN COUNTRY TOWNS. @ 3 
-3-
ONE IN FOUR FAMILIES IN COUNTRY TOWNS LIVE IN POVERTY OR
NEAR-POVERTY. THERE ARE MORE POOR FAMILIES IN AUSTRALIA'S
COUNTRY TOWNS THAN THERE ARE IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE. YOU
CAN-BE SURE OF THIS: WE ARE DETERMINED TO MAKE COUNTRY
PEOPLE EQUAL PARTNERS IN A STRONG AND PROSPEROUS AUSTRALIA,
THE GOVERNMENT WILL GET THE FACTS OF RURAL POVERTY AND BASE
ITS PROGRAMS ON THE BEST POSSIBLE ADVICE. WE ARE GOING TO
MAKE SURE THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN HAS A DECENT STANDARD OF
LIVING, A DECENT WAGE, A DECENT JOB, A DECENT HOME; THAT
EVERY AUSTRALIAN IS PROUD'OF HIS COMMUNITY AND ITS LOCAL
AMENITIES; THAT EVERY AUSTRALIAN HAS OPPORTUNIT'IES FOR
WORK, EDUCATION, RECREATION AND PERSONAL FULFILMENT EQUAL
TO THE BEST IN AUSTRALIA.-
I-WANT PENRITH AND THE NEPEAN DISTRICT TO SET AN
EXAMPLE. I WANT THEM TO SHOW WHAT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS
AT EVERY LEVEL CAN DO TO IMPROVE OPPORTUNITIES FOR COUNTRY
PEOPLE AND CITIZENS IN COUNTRY TOWNS. ONE OF OUR FIRST
INITIATIVES AS A GOVERNMENT WAS TO EMPOWER THE GRANTS
COMMISSION TO REPORT ON INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS AND
RECOMMEND GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES TO OVERCOME
SUCH INEQUALITIES. PENRITH CITY COUNCIL. HAS RECEIVED
$ 330,000 UNDER THE GRANTS COMMISSION'S FIRST RECOMMENDATIONS.
THESE ARE UNCONDITiONAL, NON-REPAYABLE GRANTS WITH NO
STRINGS ATTACHED. THEY WILL HELP PROVIDE MANY OF THE
ESSENTIAL SERVICES WHICH MODERN COMMUNITIES DEMAND. IN
THE WHOLE OF THE WESTERN REGI. ONS OF SYDNEY, INCLUDING THE
PENRITH DISTRICT, THE GRANTS TO LOCAL COUNCILS TOTALLED
MORE THAN $ 3.3 MILLION THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. 
PENRITH IS ONE OF THE REGIONS WEST OF SYDNEY
RECEIVING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE GOVERNMENT'IS
AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. THIS IS A PROGRAM TO IMPROVE
L IVING CONDITIONS BY EXPENDITURE ON RECREATION AND COMMUNITY
FACILITIES WHEREVER IT IS NEEDED.. LAST FINANCIAL YEAR~
PENRITH WAS ALLOCATED MORE THAN $ 800,000 FOR THE PURCHASE
OFE COMMUNITY LAND RESERVES, PLANTING TREES, WIDENING
ROADS, RESTORING BUILDINGS. MR. UREN A ND SIR CHARLES
CUTLER HAVE ANNOUNCED A-CONTINUATION OF AREA IMPROVEMENT
FUNDS-FOR THE PRESENT FINANCIAL YEAR. PENRITH WILL
RECEIVE NEARLY $ 300,000, AND IN ADDITION, $ 50,000 FOR
SPORTS OVALS AND AMENITIES UNDER A GRANT FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF TOURISM AND RECREATION. TOTAL SPORT AND RECREATION
GRANTS TO THE NEPEAN AREA AMOUNT TO $ 250,000.
I MENTION OTHER EXAMPLES. OUR NATIONAL SEWERAGE
PROGRAM HAS BEEN EXPANDED TO INCLUDE CITIES AND TOWNS IN THE
20,000 To 60,000 POPULATION RANGE. THAT MEANS PENRITH
WILL BENEFIT FROM OUR PROGRAM TO OVERCOME THE-NATIONWIDE
SEWERAGE BACKLOG. WITH THE CO-OPERATION OF THE N. S. W.
GOVERNMENTI WE HOPE TO DOUBLE THE CAPACITY OF THE TREATMENT"
WORKS AT ST. MARYS TO SERVE 150,000 PEOPLE.* WE. DON'T
BELIEVE PEOPLE IN IMPORTANT COUNTRY TOWNS AND RURAL
COMMUNITIES SHOULD HAVE TO PUT UP WITH INFERIOR SERVICES
OF ANY KIND. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH THE JOB OF
IMPROVING PUBLIC TRANSPORT. a, i 
OUR PROGRAMS FOR URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT WILL DIRECTLY
BENEFIT THE PEOPLE OF THE NEPEAN/ PENRITH AREA, WE ARE
PROVIDING FUNDS TO WIDEN THE GLENBROOK RAILWAY TUNNEL
AND QUADRUPLE THE RAILWAY LINE BETWEEN PENRITH AND GRANVILLE,
THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT HAS APPROVED ARTERIAL ROAD WORKS
IN THE PENRITH DISTRICT COSTING MORE THAN $ 2,5 MILLION, WE
RECOGNISE PENRITH'S UNIQUE PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN
SETTLEMENT AND ARE DETERMINED TO PRESERVE THE BEAUTIFUL AND
HISTORIC BUILDINGS OF THIS DISTRICT, OUR BUDGET FOR THE
NATIONAL ESTATE ALLOCATED $ 50,000 TO THE NATIONAL TRUST TO
HELP PURCHASE AND RESTORE TWO COTTAGES AT WINDSOR AND
$ 100,000 TO RESTORE THE EXTERIOR OF THE MACQUARIE ARMS
HOTEL,. IT IS A GREAT PLEASURE TO BE AMONG THE PEOPLE
PRODUCING THE PRIMARY WEALTH OF OUR COUNTRY AND
EXHIBITING THAT WEALTH IN SHOWS SUCH AS YOURS, WE DON'T
TAKE THE VIEW THAT BECAUSE PEOPLE LIVE IN RURAL COMMUNITIES
OR WORK ON FARMS THEY DESERVE SOMETHING LESS THAN OTHER
AUSTRALIANS, IF THE COMMUNITY HAS A DUTY TO PROVIDE
BETTER SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, ROADS AND HOUSING IN THE CITIES
IT HAS THE SAME DUTY IN THE COUNTRY AREAS, I KNOW FARMERS
SOMETIMES THINK, OR ARE PERSUADED TO THINK, THAT THEY GET
A RAW DEAL FROM A-LABOR GOVERNMENT, BUT WE KNOW YOUR
PROBLEMS, AND THEY ARE PROBLEMS FACED BY FARMERS EVERYWHERE
IN THE WORLD, / 6 
YOU CAN TAKE GREAT HEART FROM THE FACT THAT THE
WORLD WILL ALWAYS NEED, AND INCREASINGLY NEED, WHAT
YOU PRODUCE. DEPENDABLE LONG-TERM MARKETS ARE THE KEY
TO YOUR1 PROSPERITY. No GOVERNMENT HAS WORKED HARDER
TO SECURE THOSE MARKETS AND DEVELOP THE INTERNATIONAL.
GOODWILL ON WHICH TRADE DEPENDS. BEING A GR AT TRADING
. NATION BRINGS OBLIGATIONS AS WELL AS BENEFITS. WE HAVE TO
BE SURE THAT IN PROTECTING OUR LOCAL INDUSTRIES WE DON'T
HARM OUR PROSPECTS AS AN EXPORTER OF FOOD OR RAW MATERIALS.
THESE ARE DIFFICULT DECISIONS, COMPLEX DECISIONS; BUT
SUCH DECISIONS ARE THE STUFF OF MODERN GOVERNMENT. IT IS
NOT EASY TO SAFEGUARD LIVING STANDARDS AND PRESERVE JOBS
IN A WORLD OF INFLATION AND'UNEMPLOYMENT. WE NEED COOL
JUDGMENT, A STEADY NERVE, A BALANCED AND RATIONAL SYSTEM OF
PRIORITIES. WE DON'T BELIEVE IN SHORT-TERM, PATCH-UP MEASUR~ ES
TO HELP THE FARMING COMMUNITY. WE WANT TO GET TO THE ROOTS
OF YOUR DIFFICULTIES. THAT'S WHY WE ESTABLISHED THE
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION TO GIVE EXPERT ADIVCE ON
THE PROBLEMS OR ANY INDUSTRY, PRIMARY OF SECONDARY, AND TO
RECOMMEND HELP AS NEEDED. THAT'S WHY WE CALLED FOR AN
EXPERT GREEN* PAPER INTO RURAL INDUSTRY THE MOST THOROUGH
INVESTIGATION OF FARMERS'I NEEDS AND PROBLEMS EVER MADE IN
AUSTRALIA. THAT'S WHY WE ARE STUDYING THE WHOLE QUESTION
OF FLUCTUATING RURAL INCOMES TO GIVE FARMERS A MORE
STABLE AND ASSURED EXPECTATION OF INCOME OVER A LONGER
TERM AND REMOVE MUCH OF THE HARDSHIP AND UNCERTAINTY OF
RURAL LIFE. ea. 17 
-7-
I CONGRATULATE THE ORGANISERS OF THIS SHOW. IT IS
AN INSPIRATION TO SEE THE WORK OF A VIGOROUS AND BUOYANT
RURAL COMMUNITY, TO SHARE THE OPTIMISM AND HOSPITALITY
OF COUNTRY PEOPLE. I WISH YOU WELL IN YOUR EFFORTS TO
DEVELOP THE AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL POTENTIAL OF YOUR
DISTRICT AND ASSURE YOU OF THE GOVERNMENT'S SUPPORT. I
HAVE PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN THE NEPEAN DISTRICT
AGRICULTURAL, HORTICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY'S
ANNUAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 11, FEBRUARY 1975
OPENING STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER
THlE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
WHEN WE MET IN JUNE AND AUGUST LAST YEAR WE WERE
AS lIE HAD TO BE PRE-OCCUPIED WITH INFLATION. AT OUR JUNE
MEETING, I TOLD YOU THAT IF TFE ECONOMIC SITUATION CHANGED
AND IT HAS CHANGED WE WOULD MEET TO LOOK AT IT AGAIN.
INFLATION IS, OF COURSE, STILL TO BE OVERCOME, BUT THERE IS
NOW A TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE
SECOND HALF CF 1974 THE ECONOMY TURNED DOWN DRAMATICALLY.
FROM THE BOOM CONDITIONS OF THE FIRST HALF OF 1974, ECONOMIC
ACTIVITY HAS DROPPED SHARPLY AT A R. ATE NON4E OF US COULD
HAVE ANTICIPATED. MOST OTHER DEVELOPED COUNTRIES HAVE, OF
COURSE, HAD A SIMILAR EXPERIENCE OVER THIS PERIOD. REGISTERED
UNEMPLOYMENT HAS RISEN FROM A SEASONALLY ADJUSTED 1 .4 PER CENT
OF THE LABOR FORCE IN JUNE 1974 TO 4.1 PER CENT IN DECEMBER,
THE HIGHEST LEVEL SINCE THE 1930' S. THE INFLATION RATE AS
MEASURED BY THE CHANGE IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX OVER A
YEAR EARLIER ROSE FROM 14.4 PER CENT IN THE JUNE QUARTER TO
16.3 PER CENT IN THE DECEMBER OUARTER OF 1974. SOME CHARTS I
HAVE HAD PREPARED TO ILLUSTRATE THIS SITUATION ARE BEING
HANDED AROUND. THE CURRENT INFLATION ORIGINATED IN EY'TRAORDINARY
AND UNPRECEDENTED DEVELOPMEITTS IN THE ECONOMY IN THE RECENT
PAST. THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, FOR ELECTORAL REASONS,
ALLOWED A RATE OF MONETARY EXPANSION WHICH WAS TOTALLY
UNJUSTIFIABLE IN ITS RAPIDITY AND WHICH WAS MAINLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE DEMAND INFLATION OF 1972-73* AND THE INEVITABLE
CONSEQUENCE OF THE CURRENT COST INFLATION. THIS IS SOMETHING
WHICH SHOULD NOT BE FORGOTTEN AS WE ANALYSE OUR PRESENT 
-2
DIFFICULTIES. I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT OUR CURRENT INFLAT ION HAS
BEEN PUSHED ALONG BY WAGE INCREASES THAT HAVE FAR OUTPACj3' D
THE ABILITY OF FIRMS TO ABSORB THROUGH PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES
OR, IN THE PREVAILING ECONOMIC CLIMATE, TO PASS ON IN TER"-MS
OF EVEN HIGHER PRICE RISES. THE RESULT HAS BEEN A SUBSTANTIAL
SQUEEZE ON PROFITS WHICH HAS LED TO A CUT-BACK IN THE SCALE
OP' ACTIVITY AND THE POSTPONEMENT OF MANY INVESTMENT PROJECTS.
THUS THE INFLATIONARY MENACE REMAINS A PRIME CONCERN NOT LEAST
BECAUSE IT HAS BECOME INEXTRICABLY BOUND--UP IN THE PROBLEM
OF UNEMPLOYMENT. TO ACHIEVE A LASTING IMPROVEMENT IN THE UNEMPLOYMENT
SITUATION, AS WE ARE TOTALLY COMMITTED TO DOING, WE ARE
DIRECTING OUR ATTENTION TO THIS BASIC ISSUE. WE CAN, IN THE
SHORTER-TERM, MAKE SOME INROADS INTO THE UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM
AND THAT, OF COURSE, IS THE MAIN REASON WE ARE MEETING TODAY.
BUT IN MAKING DECISIONS TODAY WE MUST DO SO IN A MANNER THAT WILL
NOT MAKE THlE PROBLEM OF INFLATION MORE UNMANAGEABLE.
GENTLEMEN, THIS WAS THE CONTEXT IN WHICH IT WAS
AGREED TO PROPOSE THIS MEETING. LET M E REPEAT PART OF THE
MESSAGE I SENT TO YOU:
" IT IS ENVISAGED THAT DISCUSSION WOULD CENTRE ON:
THE AMOUNT AN) FORM OF ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE WHICH STATE GOVERNMENTS, STATE
SEMI-GOVERNMENTAL AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES
REQUIRE TO RETAIN OR RE-ENGAGE EMPLOYEES, AND 
-3
THlE REPORTS OF THE WORKING PARTIES OF
AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
ON POSSIBLE JOINT ACTION TO RESTRAIN
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES...".
I PROPOSE WE CONCENTRATE FIRST ON DISCUSSION OF ITEM
THE WORDS WERE, I EMPHASISE, CAREFULLY CHOSEN TO INDICATE
ACCURATELY THE BASIS OF OUR APPROACH. IN THIS MATTER WE
ARE FOCUSSING ON UNEMPLOYMENT; ACCORDINGLY OUR PRIMARY
CONCERN IS TO ASSESS THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF YOUR PROPOSALS.
MY GOVERNMENT HAS, AS YOU ARE AWARE, TAKEN
ACTION THROUGH MONETARY POLICY TO ENSURE THAT LIQUIDITY
IS MUCH FREER AND BANK LENDING CAN BE MAINTAINED AT A
LEVEL SUFFICIENT TO MEET THE IMMEDIATE NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY FOR FINANCE.
WE HAVE ADDED SUBSTANTIALLY TO OUR DIRECT
OUTLAYS IN A WAY THAT WILL ENHANCE EMPLOYMENT PROSPECTS.
PERSONAL INCOME TAX RATES HAVE BEEN SUBSTANTIALLY REDUCED
TO. ENCOURAGE CONSUMER SPENDING AND TO HELP OFFSET THE
PRESSURE FOR WAGE DEMANDS. COMPANY TAX RATES HAVE ALSO
BEEN REDUCED AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO DEPRECIATION
ALLOWANCES HAVE BEEN INTRODUCED TO IMPROVE COMPANY PROFITABILITY.
SPECIFIC MEASURES HAVE BEEN TAKEN TO ALLEVIATE THE IMMEDIATE
PROBLEMS OF CERTAIN INDUSTRIES INCLUDING IMPORTANTLY THE
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY.
THE ACCELERATION IN COSTS THAT IS EVIDENT IN THE
COMMUNITY AT LARGE HAS, OF COURSI', ALSO CREATED LARGE PROBLEMS
FOR THE STATES AND) THEIR AUTHORITIES WHICH IMPINGE DIRECTLY 
-4
ON THE LEVELS OF EMPLOYMENT THEY CAN SUSTAIN. I ThI1NK
YOU WILL AGREE WITH THAT, AND ACCORDINGLY I THINK YOU
WILL AGREE WITH ME WIhEN I EMPHASISE THAT WE SHOULD
APPROACH THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS, AS FAR AS IS PRACTICABLE,
IN A WAY THAT WILL NOT EXACERBATE THE PROBLEM OF INFLATION.
WE HAVE TAKEN THAT AS AN ESSENTIAL FACTOR IN OUR CONSIDERATION.
AS TO THE UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM, IT IS NOT SIMPLY
A MATTER OF ALJLOCATING MORE FUNDS FROM THE BUDGET OR SIMPLY
TRYING TO SPEND MORE MONEY. THE SITUATION IS MUCH MORE
COMPLEX THAN THAT. INCREASED EXPENDITURE MUST BE AIMED AS
DIRECTLY AS POSSIBLE AT UNEMPLOYMENT. AT THE SAME TIME WE
WILL NOT ACHIEVE OUR EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES IN THE LONGER
TERM IF WE CANNOT CURB INFLATION.
ON 28 JANUARY I ANNOUNCED THAT THE GOVERNMENT
HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH A SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS
TO REVIEW CONTINUING GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE PROGRAMS AND
TO EXAMINE ALL FUTURE EXPENDITURE PROPOSALS WHICH COME
BEFORE IT. I QUOTE NOW FROM THE STATEMENT OF 28 JANUARY:
" THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED THAT THERE OUGHT TO
BE A GENERAL PRESUMPTION AGAINST FURTHER INCREASES OF
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE. ANY SUCH INCREASE MUST MEET
THE CRITERIA ADOPTED BY CABINET" AND FURTHER:
" THE COMMITTEE WILL GIVE CAREFUL CONSIDERATION
TO THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION.
IT WILL ENSURE THAT GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES ARE
DIRECTED TO THE EMPLOYMENT OR RE-EMPLOYM'ENT OF
PEOPLE WITHOUT AGGRAVATING INFLATIONARY FORCES. 
PROPOSALS AIMED DIRECTLY AT PREVENTING SIGNIFICANT
RETRENCHMENTS WOULD HIAVE A HIGH PRIORITY AND BECAUSE
MOST JOBS THREATENED ARE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR,
THIS APPLIED PARTICULARLY TO THAT SPHERE IN THE
ECONOMY." THE STATEMENT CONCLUDED AS FOLLOWS:
" SUPPORT FOR STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
WILL BE EXAMINED WITH CARE TO ENSURE THE CAPACITY AND
WILLINGNESS OF THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
TO USE FUNDS PROVIDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
WITHIN THE APPROPRIATE TIME SPAN."
THAT STATEMENT OF 28 JANUARY WAS NOT MADE LIGHTLY. IT
WILL ESTABLISH THE POINT IF I TELL YOU THAT ON THE BASIS
OF OUR LATEST ESTIMATES WE FACE A VERY HEAVY DEFICIT IN
OUR BUDGET FOR 1974-75. IT WOULD CLEARLY BE A COMPLETELY
WRONG ASSUMPTION FOR ANYONE TO MAKE, THAT THERE IS MUCH
LEFT TO BE SQUEEZED OUT OF OUR BUDGET THIS YEAR -ANY "-ONS",
AS THEY SAY, WILL NEED TO BE MATCHED BY " OFFS" -THAT WILL
BE PART OF THE ROLE OF THE NEW EXPENDITURE COMMITTEE. THE
POINT IS THAT ANY ASSISTANCE WHICH MY GOVERNMENT PROVIDES
TO THE STATES WILL HAVE TO BE ADDED TO OUR BUDGET DEFICIT.
IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES WE ARE ENTITLED TO HAVE THE CLEAREST
JUSTIFICATION FOR ADDING TO OUR DEFICIT. 
-6
THE NEXT DAY, ON 29 JANUARY, I ASKED IN MY MESSAGE
YOU COULD PROVIDE URGENTLY SUCH INFORMATION NOT
ALREADY AVAILABLE TO US AS WOULD ASSIST IN AN ASSESSMENT
OF YOUR STATE'S NEEDS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE INCLUDING
ASSISTANCE FOR ROADS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CRITERION
OUTLINED" EARLIER IN THE MESSAGE.
OUR ASSESSMENT OF YHAT ASSISTANCE SEEMS APPROPRIATE
TO ENABLE YOUR GOVERNMENTS AND SEMI-GOVE~ RNMENTAL AND LOCAL
AUTHORITIES TO RETAIN OR RE-ENGAGE EMPLOYEES, HAS BEEN MADE
AS IT PROPERLY HAD TO BE MADE ON THE BASIS OF THE
INFORMATION YOU HAVE PROVIDED TO US IN YOUR LETTERS AND
YOUR DISCUSSIONS WITH THE TREASURER. WE DO READ THE
NEWSPAPERS, OF COURSE, AND THEY HAVE WRITTEN MUCH IN RECENT
DAYS ABOUT WHAT THE STATES NEED OR SAY THEY NEED. BUT I
THINK YOU WILL ALLOW THAT SUCH REPORTS AS THEY PURVEY COULD
SCARCELY BE A BASIS FOR SERIOUS CONSIDERATION BY US ALONGSIDE
THE INFORMATION YOU HAVE PROVIDED TO US DIRECTLY.
THE INFORMATION YOU HAVE ALREADY FURNISHED
REGARDING THE PROBLEMS YOU FACE IN THE MAINTENANCE OR
RESTORATION OF EMPLOYMENT MAKE IT CLEAR THAT ALL THE STATES'
BUDGETS HAVE SUFFERED FROM THlE EFFECT OF INCREASES IN WAGE
-AND SALARY RATES, AN~ n OTHER COSTS. IN ALL STATES, THE SEMIGOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES HAVE FACED THE SAME DIFFICULTIES ON
THIS SCORE AS HAVE THE STATES THEMSELVES; CLEARLY THEIR
COSTS HAVE RISEN MUCH MORE THAN THE 12 PER CENT INCREASE
IN THEIR BORROWING PROGRAMS WHICH THE LOAN COUNCIL AGREED
LAST JUNE. IN ALL STATES ALSO SPENDING ON ROADS HAS BEEN
AFFECTED 13Y RAPIDLY RISING COSTS. 
-7
OUR PROPOSALS WHICH I SHALL PUT TO YOU ARE IN
THEIR PARTICULAR FORM ANT) MAGNITUDE, A RESPONSE TO THESE
PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES. THEY DO NOT REPRESENT ON-GOING
ARRANGEMENTS, THE PROPOSALS RELATE TO THE PRESENT THEY
ARE TAILORED TO THE PRESENT UNEMPLOYMENT DIFFICULTIES.
THE PREMIERS OF NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA,
QUEENSLAND AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA HAVE PROPOSED THAT
$ 300 MILLION BE ALLOCATED TO THE STATES FOR REDUCING
CHARGES WHICH BEAR DIRECTLY ON THE COST-OF-LIVING. THIS
PROPOSAL, WHICH IS REALLY A REPETITION OF ONE DISCUSSED
LAST AUGUST, HAS BEEN CONVEYED TO ME IN A LETTER FORWARDED
TO ME BY THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA. I DO NOT THINK PREMIERS
WILL BE SURPRISED, PARTICULARLY IN THE LIGHT OF OUR EARLIER
DISCUSSION, WHEN I SAY THAT THIS PROPOSAL IS NOT ONE THAT
APPEALS TO US.
I RE-EMPHASISE THE POINT I MADE THAT WE ARE
PREPARED TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE
STATES WHICH WILL HELP WITH THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEM OF
UN EMPLOYMENT; AND WE ARE PREPARED TO ADD TO OUR ALREADY
LARGE DEFICIT FOR THIS FINANCIAL YEAR TO THAT END. WE DO
NOT SEE IN THE PROPOSED ALLOCATION OF $ 300 MILLION FOR
REDUCTION OF CHARGES, A POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE
SHORT-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT PRCBLEM WHICH WOULD JUSTIFY SUCH
AN ADDITION TO OUR DEFICIT.
AGAINST THAT BACKGROUND AND SUBJECT TO My
GOVERNMENT'S CONSIDERATION OF THE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
REQUESTED IN MY MESSAGE OF 12 FEBRUARY, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS PREPARED TO PROVIDE SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNTS OF 
-8
ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO THE STATES IN 1974-75 FOR EMPLOYMENT
PURPOSES. A DOCUMENT DETAILING O{ JR PROPOSALS WILL BE
CIRCULATED. VERY BRIEFLY, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
PREPARED TO SUPPORT THE PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR
THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES IN 1974-75 TOTALLING
$ 210 MILLION. THIS IS MADE UP AS FOLLOWS:-
ADDITIONAL GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS OF $ 60 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL STATE GOVERNMENT LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS
OF $ 60 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL BORROWING ALLOCATIONS FOR LARGER STATE
AUTHORITIES OF $ 40 MILLION;
ADDITIONAL EMPLOYMENT GRANTS OF
$ 30 MILLION FOR ROADS
$ 20 MILLION FOR GENERAL EMPLOYMENT PURPOSES.
THE PRECISE BASES ON WHICH THE ASSISTANCE WILL
BE MADE AVAILABLE ARE SET OUT IN THE DOCUMENT TO BE CIRCULATED.
THERE IS ONE OTHER STATISTIC I MIGHT MENTION HERE.
TAKING. INTO ACCOUNT THE ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO WHICH I HAVE
REFERRED, AGGREGATE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS TO THE
STATES IN 1974-75 ARE NOW ESTIMATED AT ABOUT $ 6,420 MILLION
AN INCREASE OF NO LESS THAN 47 PER CENT OVER LAST YEAR. I
SHOULD POINT OUT THAT THIS TOTAL INCLUDES A FURTHER ADJUSTMENT
OF $ 23 MILLION TO THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS, ARISING
FROM REVISED ASSUMPTIONS FOR POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES.
I CAN ASSURE YOU, HOWEVER, THAT IN IT WE HAVE
ENDEAVOURED AS EFFECTIVELY AS POSSIBLE TO MEET THE VARIOUS
NEEDS AND OBJECTIVES WITH THE MOST APPROPRIATE AMOUNTS AND
FORMS OF ASSISTANCE, TA KING FULLY INTO ACCOUNT TH-E COMPREHEl-NSIVE 
9-
DATA YOU HAVE SUPPLIED. WE HAVE ALSO KEPT IN MIND OUR
OVER-RIDING OBJECTIVE OF COMBATING EXCESSIVE INFLATION AND
EXCESSIVE UNEMPLOYMENT.
REPORT OF THE WORKING PARTIES ON INFLATION
I TURN NOW TO THE SECOND ITEM ON OUR AGENDA THE
REPORTS OF THE WORKING PARTIES OF AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS ON POSSIBLE JOINT ACTION TO RESTRAIN INFLATIONARY
PRESSURES. THIS SECOND AGENDA ITEM BRINGS US TO THE OTHER
MAJOR PROBLEM AREA FACING AUSTRALIA TODAY, THAT IS INFLATION
A PROBLEM WHICH M4AY IN THE LONG TERM BE MORE PERMANENTLY
DAMAGING TO OUR WAY OF LIFE THAN THE UNEMPLOYMENT LEVELS
WHICH ARE TROUBLING US SO MUCH TO-DAY.
TO SUCCESSFULLY TACKLE INFLATION WE NEED A NATIONAL
ALL-AUSTRALIAN EFFORT BASED ON THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL THE
PARTIES IN OUR FEDERAL UNION.
AT OUR CONFERENCE, HERE, ON 13 AUGUST LAST YEAR,
ALMOST EXACTLY SIX MONTHS AGO, AS PART OF OUR OVERALL STRATEGY
TO THIS END, WE ESTABLISHED FIVE WORKING PARTIES OF AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS TO EXAMINE AREAS WHERE JOINT
ACTION BY ALL OUR GOVERNMENTS MIGHT BE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN
INFLATIONARY PRESSURES.
THE WORKING PARTIES EXAMINED AREAS OF:
STATE LEGISLATION TO SUPPORT THE JURISDICTION
OF THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL.
TENDERING PROCEDURES FOR GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS.
THE POSSIBILITY OF INTRODUCING TAXATION PENALTIES
ON EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES. 
10
JOINT ACTION BEFORE WAGE FIXING TRIBUNALS TO LIMIT
WAGE INCREASES.
MEASURES TO REDUCE THE MULTIPLICITY OF WAGE FIXING
TRI BUNALS.
IN THE MAIN, THESE REPORTS WHICH WERE DISTRIBUTED
TO YOU BY 18 SEPTEMBER, REFLECT IN VARYING DEGREES AGREEMENT
BETWEEN OUR OFFICERS ON WAYS AND MEANS OF ACHIEVING CONCERTED
ACTION ON IMPORTANT NATIONAL PROBLEMS. THEY ARE, THEREFORE,
WORTHY OF OUR SERIOUS CONSIDERATION AS A POSSIBLE BASIS FOR
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US IN THE FIELDS CONCERNED.
I HAVE RECEIVED COMMENTS FROM MOST OF YOU ( YOUR
RESPONSES ARE SUMMARISED IN A TABLE I AM CIRCULATING). IN
SOME CASES, YOU HAVE HAD LITTLE COMMhENT TO MAKE ON THESE REPORTS,
OR HAVE INDICATED THAT YOU WISHED TO DISCUSS THE FINDINGS OF
THESE COMMITTEES AT A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE. I VERY MUCH
APPRECIATE THE DETAILED CONSIDERATION THAT MANY OF YOU HAVE
GIVEN TO THE REPORTS.
ON THE BASIS OF YOUR VIEWS, I AM HOPEFUL THAT WE
WILL BE ABLE TO REACH AGREEMENT TODAY ON THE MORE IMPORTANT
CONCLUSIONS REACHED IN SOME OF THESE REPORTS.
ADDITIONALLY, ON 21 AUGUST THE PREMIER OF VICTORIA
WROTE TO ME SUGGESTING, INTER ALIA, THAT A WORKING PARTY SHOULD
BE ESTABLISHED TO EXAMINE THE PRACTICABILITY OF LEGISLATION BY
THE STATES TO EXTEND THE SCOPE OF THE LEGISLATION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT FOR THE CONTROL OF RESTRICTIVE TRADE
PRACTICES. I SUPPORTED THIS SUGGESTION AND IN TURN SUGGESTED
TO ALL OF YOU ON 16 SEPTEMBER 1974 THAT WE SHOULD ESTABLISH
SUCH A WORKING PARTY. THE PRlEMIERS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WVESTERN
AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA HAVE ALREADY AGREED TO THIS PRO1POSAL AND 
11
THE OTHER PREMIERS HAVE THIS MATTER STILL UNDER CONSIDERATION.
SOME WORK ARISING OUT OF THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE OF 10 MAY
1973 HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE IN THIS REGARD AND SUBJECT TO YOUR
AGREEMENT I PROPOSE THAT WE NOW ESTABLISH A WORKING PARTY TO
EXAMINE THIS QUESTION.
I REFER FIRST TO THE REPORT ON THE QUESTION OF STATE
LEGISLATION TO SUPPORT THE JURISDICTION OF THE PRICES
JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL. SINCE THIS REPORT WAS COMPLETED,
THERE HAD, OF COURSE, BEEN A MARKED, A ND LARGELY UNANTICIPATED,
CHANGE IN ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AS IS ILLUSTRATED IN THE CHARTS
I HAVE CIRCULATED. UNEMPLOYMENT HAS JUMPED TO A HIGH LEVEL
MAINLY AS A RESULT OF A SEVERE SQUEEZE ON PROFITS. THIS IN
TURN HAS ARISEN FROM THE RELATIVE SUCCESS OF THE MEASURES WE
HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN THE GROWTH IN PRICES, IN THE FACE OF A
CCNTINUED ACCELERATION IN WAGES.
AS YOU WILL BE AWARE, LAST NOVEMBER I MADE A SUBMISSION
IN WRITING TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THlE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
TO INDICATE THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMKENT'S VIEW THAT, IN PRESENT
ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES, THE TRIBUNAL SHOULD GIVE PARTICULAR
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEMS OF SUSTAINING AND STIMULATING AN
ADEQUATE LEVEL OF PRIVATE INVESTMENT. I BELIEVE THAT THE
TRIBUNAL HAS BEEN DOING THIS AND, INDEED, THAT IT HAD ALREADY
TAKEN SOME STEPS IN THIS DIRECTION PRIOR TO MY SUBMISSION.
I CONSIDER THAT THE ADOPTION AT THIS STAGE OF PROPOSALS
TO STRENGTHEN THE TRIBUNAL'S ROLE COULD EASILY BE MISUNDERSTOOD
ANT) COUNTERPRODUCTIVE FOR OUR PRIME AIM OF RESTORING FULL
RvIP[ LOYMI. NT. RATHER THIAN PROCEED ING WITH ThE-IM NOW, 1. SUGGET WAfi'
LEAVE THEM FOR FUTURE CONSIDERATION IF CIRCUMSTANCES SHOULD SO
I 
12-
WARRANT. I WISH, HOWEVER, TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO RAISE
AGAIN WITH YOU THE SUBJE~ CT OF LAND PRICES, WHICH IS OF GREAT
CONCERN TO MY GOVERNMENT. AS EARLY AS 27 DECEM1BER 1972 I
WROTE TO ALL STATE PREMIERS SEEKING THEIR CO-OPERATION ON
TIS IMPORTANT ISSUE, WHICH IS AN AREA IN WHICH THE STATES
HAVE THE PREDOMINANT POWERS. YOU WILL RECALL THAT I RAISED
IT AGAIN AT THE FIRST PREMIERS' CONFERENCE I CHAIRED ON 10 MAY
1973 AND SOUGHT THE CO-OPERATION OF ALL STATES TOWA12DS THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE LAND COI% 2ISSIONS TO PARTICIPATE ACTIVELiY
IN THE LAND MARKET AND TO INCREASE THE FLOW OF RESIDENTIAL
LAND AT REASONABLE PRICES. I CONTINUE TO BE CONCERNED THAT ALL
POSSIBLE ACTION SHOULD BE TAKEN BY THE STATES TO INCREASE THIE
SUPPLY OF LAND AND LIMIT THE RATE OF INCREASE IN RESIDENTIAL
LAND PRICES. THE WORKING PARTY WHICH EXAMINED TENDERING PROCEDURES
FOR GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS NOMINATED SEVERAL AREAS WHERE EFFECTIVyE
ACTION COULD REDUCE THE LEVEL OR RATE OF INCREASE IN BUILDING
AND CONSTRUCTION COSTS FOR GOVERNMENT WORKS. MY GOVERNMENT S W'RONGLY
SUPPORTS THE WORKING PARTY RECCMYIENDATION THAT INCREASED
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION AT THE GOVERNM4ENTAL, DEPARTMENT AND
INDUSTRY/ TRADE UNION LEVEL CAN ACHIEVE INTER ALIA:
AN AVOIDANCE OF INDUSTRY RESOURCE UTILIZATION
EXTREMES AND THE STIMULATION AND
RATIONALISATION OF COMPETITION IN THE FIELD
BY REGULATING THE VOLUME AND TYPE OF
CONSTRUCTION WORK. 
13
THIS, I SUGGEST HAS PARTICULAR IMNPACT WHEN
CONSIDERED ON A REGIONAL BASIS.
A REDUCTION IN INFLATIONARY EXPECTATION
ELEMENTS OF CONTRACT TENDERS FOR GOVERNMENT
WORKS. REDUCED OVERHEAD AND HOLDING CHARGES FOR
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS.
I SUGGEST THAT WE NOW ASK THE WORKING PARTY TO FRAME PRACTICAL
PROPOSALS WITH A VIEW TO AN EARLY MEETING OF RELEVAiNT MINISTERS.
WITH REGARD TO THE WORKING PARTY ON TAX PENALTIES
ON COMPANIES THAT GRANT EXCESSIVE WAGE INCREASES I SOUGHT YOlUR
COMMENTS ON THE REPORT PREPARED BY OUR OFFICIALS IN SEPTEMBER
1974. NOT ALL THE PREMIERS HAVE PROVIDED COMMIENTS. THOSE WHO
HAVE, HAVE EXPRESSED DIFFERING VIEWS. SOME OF YOU HAVE
RECOGNISED THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIFFICULTIES AND ANOMALIES BOUND
UP IN ANY SCHEME OF TAX PENALTIES.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ITSELF HAD THIS COMPLEX
ISSUE EXAMINED BY A CCMMITTEE UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF DR COOMBS.
THE CCMMITTEE'S REPORT, WHICH I MADE PUBLIC ON
21 OCTOBER 1974, UNANIMOUSLY EXPRESSED THE VIEW THAT A PENAL
TAX OF THE KIND ENVISAGED dOULD BE ADMINISTERED AT CONSIDERABLE
COST, BUT ONLY IF THE SCHEME WERE CONFINED TO A FEW THOUSAND
LARGE FIRMS. THE COMMITTEE WENT ON TO SAY THAT EVEN THEN THE
SCHEME WOULD INEVITABLY CREATE SERIOUS ANOMALIES AND INEQUITIES
AND WOULD CREATE DIFFICULTIES IN RELATIONS BETWEEN BUSINESS AND
TIHE TAX AUTHORITIES AND) ALSO BETI1IEN EMPLOYERS AN]) E,' PLOYEES A\)
TIAT COULI 1, I; AJ) ' rT O SON I UJSSr NI.-;: S; ' A TiUTI i 
14
THE GOVERNMENT'S VIEW IS THAT THE INTRODUCTION OF A
PENALTY TAX SCHEME WOULD BE INAPPROPRIATE IN PRESENT
CIRCUMSTANCES WHEN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IS AT A LOW LEVEL. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DOES NOT WISH TO TAKE ANY ACTION WHICH
WOULD DISCOURAGE THE EXPANSION OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
THERE WERE ALSO TWO WORKING PARTIES ON WAGES MATTERS.
ONE WAS ON ACTION TO LIMIT INFLATIONARY WAGE INCREASES; SOME OF
YOU HAVE ALREADY COMMENTED ON ITS REPORT. THE OTHER, ON PRACTICAL
STEPS TO REDUCE THE MULTIPLICITY OF WAGE FIXING TRIBUNALS, IS
STILL AT WORK, ALTHOUGH A SECOND INTERIM REPORT HAS NOW BEEN
PRODUCED. I SUGGEST THAT OUR LABOR MINISTERS MEET TO CONSIDER
THE REPORT AND I CONSIDER THAT WE SHOULD TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO AGREE TO URGE THEM TO EXPEDITE THEIR WORK IN THIS FIELD.
AS I SAID EARLIER, THE PRESENT SEVERE SQUEEZE ON PROFITS
AND THE RESULTANT UNEMPLOYMENT HAS ARISEN PARTLY FROM THE
RELATIVE SUCCESS OF THE MEASURES WE HAVE TAKEN TO RESTRAIN THE
GROWTH IN PRICES, IN THE FACE CF A CONTINUED ACCELERATION IN WAGES.
IN MAKING THAT STATEMENT WHICH I BELIEVE HAS
WIDESPREAD ACCEPTANCE I DC NOT SEEK TO APPORTION BLAME. THE
PRESENT SITUATION HAS ARISEN OUT OF OUR EXISTING INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS AND THE BREAKDOVN; OF ESTABLISHED METHODS OF WAGE
FIXATION. IT HAS OCCURRED WILLY NILLY OF THE GOOD INTENTIONS
CF THOSE ARBITRATORS AND EMPLOYERS, AS WELL AS UNIONS AND
INDIVIDUAL WAGE EARNERS WHO HAVE BEEN DIRECTLY INVOLVED. THE
PROBLEM HAS BEEN TOO LARGE FOR INDIVIDUALS TO DEAL WITH. OUR
ROLE, AS GOVERNMENTS, IS TO DO WHAT WE CAN TO RESTORE A FRAMEVORK
IN WHICH ORDER CAN BE RE-ESTABLISHED IN THE WAGES AREA.
IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS TERMS OF REFERENCE, TH]; E WORKING
PARTY WE ESTABLISHED) ON ACTION TO LIMIT INFLATIONARY VAGE INCIREAi::. 
15
TOOK THE INTRODUCTION OF WAGE INDEXATION AS ITS STARTING POINT.
WHETHER OR NOT WAGE INDEXATION WILL BE INTRODUCED IS OF COURSE
A MATTER WIICH IS BEING FULLY DEBATED IN THE PROPER ARENA
BEFORE THE ARBITRATION COMMISSION BY ALL THE INTERESTED PARTIES,
AND THE COMMIISSION WILL IN DUE COURSE ANN. OUNCE ITS DECISION.
NEVERTHELESS, WHATEVER THE NATURE OF THE COMMISSION'S
DECISION, WE M1ST ALL RECOGNISE THAT WE WILL STILL BE CONFRONTED
WITH A SERIOUS SITUATION ON THE WAGES FRONT. IF TIE COMMISSION
DECIDES TO INTRODUCE AUTOMATIC INDEXATION OR ADOPTS SOME
INTERMEDIATE COURSE, UNDER WHICH ADJUSTMENTS FOR PRICES WOULD
BE REGULAR BUT NOT NECESSARILY AUTOMATIC, THEN OUR PRIME CONCERN
MUST BE TO ENSURE THAT THIS DOES NOT JUST BECOME AN ADDITIONAL
TIER TO WAGE FIXATION. WE CANNOT AFFORD A FURTHER NEW ROUND OF
WAGE INCREASES ON TOP OF WAGE INDEXATION. ON THE OTHER HAND,
IF THE COMMISSION DECIDES TO MAKE NO CRANGE TO THE EXISTING
SYSTEM OF WAGE FIXATION, OUR CONCERN WILL BE TO ENSURE THAT THE
EXPERIENCE OF 1974 IS NOT REPEATED AND THAT WAGE INCREASES ARE
KEPT WITHIN BOUNDS THAT WILL NOT FURTHER EXACERBATE UNEMPLOYMENT
AND INFLATION.
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS
BEFORE CONCLUDING, THERE ARE SOME POINTS I SHOULD MAKE
ABOUT THE REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS TO
WHICH WE ARE COMMITTED BEFORE THE END OF THIS FINANCIAL YEAR.
PREM1IERS WILL RECALL THAT I WROTE TO THEM ON 20 NOVIZ'IBER
LAST INVITING THEIR VIEWS. WE HAVE NOT YET HAD ANY SUBSTANTIVE 
16
SUBMISSIONS AND WE LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING THESE AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE SO THAT WE HAVE TIME TO CONSIDER THEM IN DEPTH.
IN FACT, I WANT TO MAKE IT CLEAR TO PREMIERS THAT WE
ARE REGARDING THIS REVIEW, AT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT END,
AS A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE; THAT WE WANT TO CANVASS ALL OPTIONS
OPEN TO US, AND THAT WE ARE AIMING TO CONDUCT THE REVIEW IN A
FULLY CO-OPERATIVE FASHION WITH THE STATES AND IN THE HOPE
THAT THE REVIEW WILL RESULT IN AN IMIROVEMENT IN RELATIONSHIPS
FROM ALL POINTS OF VIEW.
YOU WILL PROBABLY HAVE READ OF THE RECENT ESTABLISHMENT
OF A SMALL MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE TO WORK ON THIS. I EXPECT
THAT COMMITTEE WILL BE MEETING FREQUENTLY OVER THE NEXT FEW
WEEKS. WHAT WE WOULD THEN LIKE TO SEE HAPPEN IS A PROCESS OF
FULL AND FRUNK DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OUR. TREASURY
OFFICIALS. SPEAKING FOR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, I CAN SAY
THAT WE WOULD WANT ALL THE OPTIONS TO BE DISCUSSED BETWEEN THE
OFFICIALS WITHOUT COMMITMENT, AND WE WOULD AUTHORISE OU] I OFFICIALS
TO ENGAGE IN SUCH DISCUSSIONS AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF GUIDANCE
WHICH WE WOULD BE GIVING THEM. OUR AIM WOULD BE THAT OUR
OFFICIALS BEGIN SUCH DISCUSSIONS EARLY IN APRIL. IF THE STATES
ARE PREPARED TO CO-OPERATE IN THIS NEW APPROACH, I WOULD HOPE
THE RESULT WOULD BE THAT WHEN WE MEET TOGETHER TO REVIEW THE
GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS LATER IN THE FINANCIAL
YEAR WE WILL DO SO ON THE BASIS OF MUCH GREATER KNOWLEDGE, ON
BOTH SIDES, OF THE OPTIONS AVAILABLE AND OF ATTITUDES TO THOSE
OPTIONS. OUR DISCUSSIONS WOULD THEREFORE BE ( AS THEY OUGHT TO
BE FOR SUCH AN IMPORTANT MATTER) ON A MUCH MORE PREPARED AND
RESEIRCII BASIS I'JAN HAS (.; ENE. IZALLY bN,, N TEI, CASE IN Ti.' ., ASI.,
YOU MAY IAVE NOTICED ALSO THAT IN ANNOUNCING TlE 
17
ESTABIMICMhXT OF THE MIN ISTLI.: lAL. CO:&gt; IJTTEE I MADE SPECIAL
REFERENCE TO OUR POLICI ES TOWARDS PECI ONS, LOCAL AUT1tCE ITIFS
AND CONNIT': ITY PAjITICIPATION I WOUlD EXPECT THAT AS A RiKULT
OF THE WC! RK OF THIS COMMIP" TTEEf: THERR WOULD BE DISCUSSI ONS WiTH
THE STATES AT THE OFFICIAL LEVEL.
THE GENERAL MATTER? OF FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS lETWEEN
THE AUSTNALIAN GOVERNMENI! AIND STATE GOVERNM. ENTS WILL PE
DISCUSSYD WITHIN TPh E CONTEXT OF THlE REVIEW 0OF GENERAL REVEN: UE
ASSISTANCE. TIHE PURPOSE GF TODAY'S v;] EETING IS MORE SPECIFIC.
AS YOU WILL ALL BE AWARE, THE GOVERNMELNT HAS TAKEN A NUMB3ER
OF SPECIA\ L. MEASURES TO RJSTO. E FULL iPLOYMENT. FOR ENAMPLE,
THE GOVI: ENMENT MADE? A SERIES OF DECISTONS TO PREVENT
fETRENCHN11\ 11 : NTS IN TilE M1OTOR INDUSTRYV. SIMILARLY, TODAY WE ARE
SEEKING TO ENSURIE THAT STATE GOVERRN: NTS AND THEIR
INsTRUMEN: TALIT IES ARE ABLE TO MAKE TIII R CONTRi BUTION T: 0
THE RESTORATION OP FULL EMPLOY1MENT BY RE-ENGAGEMENT, BY TrlE
PREVENTION OF FURTHER RETRENCHMENT AND TO SOME EXTENT, BY
THE CREATION OF A) DITIONAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES. I
TRUST TIIEREFORE THAT BOTH DURING AND AFTER THE MEETING,
THE SPIRIT OP OUR DISCUSSICNS AND STATEnENTS ' V. ILL REFLECi'
A GREAT3, ER CO-OPERATIVE SPIT1' 1' THAW EAS BEEN TUE OF MA\ Y
OTHER PRE. MIJERS' CON. FElENCES.
OUR OFFER OF FINANCIAL ASS] KEANCE IS, I ASSU; E YOU,
CAREFULLY AND OBlJECTIVELY TA I LORE]) TAK1ING FULL ACCOUNT OF1-'
YOUR SUBMI: SSIONS ANI) GIVING DUE WEIGHflT TO TI TOTAL ECCNGMIC
AND SOCIAL CU( NTEXT. IT : S CFFERH) IN A SPIRiT OF
CO-OPERATION AND) UNJERSTA: ING. I UOPE YOU WILL READILY
ACCEPT ALONG ' IT rTE SPECIFI C PZOPCSAL I HAVE Yui
TO YOU. 
18
IF, AS I TRUST, W} E CAN REACH1 AGREEIMNT QUICKLY AT
THIS STAGE, I PROPOSE THAT WE ADJOURN TiHE PREMIERS'
CONFERENCE Sc THAT A BRIEF FORMAL MEE9TING OF THE'-LOAN
COUNCIL MA. Y BE COI'% WENED TO DEAL WITH OUR DECISIONS HA~ rING
LOAN COUNCIL IMPLICATIONS. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE HOBART CIVIC RECEPTION, 15 FEBRUARY 1975
1. IN 1803 LIEUTENANT JOHN BOWEN MADE THE FIRST
EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT IN TASMANIA AT RiSDON ON. THE
EASTERN SHORE OF THE DERWENT. THE SETTLEMENT
WAS NAMED HOBART AFTER LORD HOBART THEN BRITISH
COLONIAL SECRETARY. THE SITE WAS LATER FOUND
TO BE UNSUITABLE.
2. IN FEBRUARY 1804 19 FEBRUARY, 171 YEARS AGOLIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR DAVID COLLINS SELECTED A
SPOT FIVE MILES FARTHER DOWNSTREAM AT SULLIVAN
COVE AND TOOK POSSESSION FOR THE SETTLEMENT
PROPER OF HOBART TOWN. THIS NAME REMAINED IN
OFFICIAL USE UNTIL 1881.
3. GOVERNOR MACQUARIE VISITED HOBART TOWN IN 1811
AND FOUND BUILDINGS ERECTED IN A VERY IRREGULAR
MANNER AND WITHOUT ANY PLAN WHATEVER. HE HAD
A PLAN DRAWN UP SHOWING A MAIN SQUARE AND
SEVEN STREETS AND HE FORMULATED REGULATIONS
FOR FUTURE BUILDING. ON. HIS SECOND VISIT IN
1821, MACQUARIE WAS IMPRESSED BY THE
IMPROVEMENT MADE. 
-2-
14. IN 1838 A POLICE ACT WAS PASSED WHICH WAS THE
GENESIS OF HOBART'IS MUNICIPAL HISTORY. UNDER IT
THE SURVEYOR GENERAL WAS AUTHORISED TO SET OUT
THE LIMITS OF THE TOWN; OTHER SECTIONS RELATED
TO SUCH MATTERS AS THE MARKING OUT OF FOOTPATHS
AND THE BREADTH OF CARRIAGE-WAYS.
IN 18142, HOBART WAS CREATED A CITY. FROM 1846
IT WAS GOVERNED BY COMMISSIONERS ( ELECTED BY
THE RATEPAYERS) WHO PROVIDED FOR LIGHTING,
CLEANING AND PAVING. THEIR POWERS WERE LIMITED,
AND IN 1852 AN ACT WAS PASSED ESTABLISHING A
MUNICIPALITY. IN 1857 HOBART WAS INCOPORATED
AS A CITY, AND ITS MOTTO SIC FORTIS HOBARTIA
CREVIT THUS IN STRENGTH DOES HOBART GROW.
6. THE FIRST MAYOR OF HOBART WAS WILLIAM CARTER IN
1853. THE PRESENT LORD MAYOR, ALDERMAN SOUNDY,
HAS HELD OFFICE SINCE 1970. HIS FATHER WAS,
IN 1932,. THE LAST PERSON TO BE CALLED MAYOR
OF HOBART. By 1938 AFTER A PERIOD OUTSIDE THE
TOWN HALL, HE HAD BECOME THE SECOND LORD MAYOR
OF HOBART. SIR JOHN SOUNDY SET A FINE CIVIC
RECORD FOR HIS SON TO FOLLOW. THE SOUNDY
FAMILY HAS MADE AN EXTRAORDINARY CONTRIBUTION
TO THE GOOD GOVERNMENT OF THE CITY OF HOBART. 3 
-3-
7. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S CONCERN FOR THE WELFARE
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SPEAKS FOR ITSELF. LAST YEAR
WE MADE GRANTS OF $ 56,345., 000 TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. OF THAT SUM,
$ 1,669,000 CAME To TASMANIA. IT WAS THE FIRST
TIME IN AUSTRALIA'S HISTORY THAT AN AUSTR'ALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAD MADE DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENT.
8. MANY PEOPLE FOUND IT DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND
WHY NO GRANT WAS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE HOBART
CITY COUNCIL. THE GRANTS COMMISSION HAS GIVEN
A GREAT DEAL OF THOUGHT TO THE STATUS OF CAPITAL
CITY LOCAL GOVERNING BODIES, AND THE EVIDENCE
INDICATES THAT EACH OF THEM HAS A VERY
SUBSTANTIAL ABOVE-STANDARD CAPACITY TO RAISE
REVENUE. THE COMMISSION DECIDED TO RECOMMEND
THAT NO GRANTS BE MADE TO THE CAPITAL CITY
COUNCILS IN SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, PERTH
AND HOBART.
9. YOU WILL-ALL BE AWARE THAT A SPECIAL PREMIERS
CONFERENCE WAS HELD YESTERDAY IN CANBERRA.
WE RECOGNISE THE NEED FOR MORE. DIALOGUE BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES AND ONLY
LAST WEEK I ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF A SPECIAL
COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS TO BE CONCERNED PRIMARILY
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RELATIONS WITH
THE STATES. eie/ 4 
THIS COMMITTEE WILL ALSO EXAMINE PROGRAMS OF DIRECT
ASSISTANCE TO REGIONS, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL
COMMUNITIES, YESTERDAY IN CANBERRA YOUR PREMIER, ERIC REECE,
AND I SIGNED AGREEMENTS BETWEEN OUR GOVERNMENTS
RELATING TO THE NATIONAL ESTATE AND NATIONAL
SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, THE TWO AGREEMENTS UNDER
THE URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ( FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE) ACT AMOUNT TO FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
OF MORE THAN $ 3 MILLION, TASMANIA'S GRANT OF
$ 895,277 FOR NATIONAL ESTATE PURPOSES WILL GO
TOWARDS THE PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS
AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSERVATION STUDIES
AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS,
11. I AM DELIGHTED THAT $ 15,000 HAS BEEN ALLOCATED
FOR ASSISTANCE WITH MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION
WORK ON THE THEATRE ROYAL THE OLDEST AND
SURELY THE MOST BEAUTIFUL THEATRE IN AUSTRALIA,
I AM LOOKING FORWARD VERY MUCH TO THE ROYAL
SHAKESPEARE COMPANY'S PERFORMANCE THERE TONIGHT, 
12. THE HOBART CITY COUNCIL IS TO RECEIVE $ 6,000
FOR A STUDY OF THE FUTURE USES OF SALAMANCA PLACE
AND ITS REMARKABLY PRESERVED HISTORIC STONE
WAREHOUSES. THE FACT THAT THE AREA NOW PULSES
WITH LIFE THROUGH ITS SATURDAY OPEN-AIR MARKET
AND ITS RESTAURANTS, THAT THE ARTS ARE
ENCOURAGED AND THAT TALENTED YOUNG PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO TURN 63 SALAMANCA PLACE INTO A
FAVOURITE COMMUNAL RESOURCE CENTRE IS A
TRIBUTE TO THE IMAGINATION OF BOTH THE CITY
COUNCIL AND THE PEOPLE OF HOBART.
13, THE HOBART CITY COUNCIL HAS ALSO RECEIVED A
GRANT OF $ 175,000 THROUGH TOURISM AND RECREATION
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A SYNTHETIC ATHLETICS
TRACK. THIS IS IN ADDITION TO LAST YEAR'S
GRANT OF $ 60,000 FOR THE TRACK AND FIELD
CENTRE. IN VIEW OF MAX WALKER'S GREAT PERFORMANCE
ON THE MAINLAND IN THIS LAST TEST SERIES,
MAYBE SOME MORE INVESTMENT IN CRICKET PROMOTION
HERE WOULD BE MORE THAN JUSTIFIED.
14. LAST YEAR $ 300,000 WAS APPROVED UNDER THE CHILD
CARE ACT, BUT I UNDERSTAND THE COUNCIL HAS HAD
SOME DIFFICULTY IN FINDING A SUITABLE SITE FOR
BUILDING. I HOPE THAT WE WILL BE ABLE TO SEE
THAT GRANT AT WORK FOR THE BENEFIT OF HOBART'S
YOUNG CHILDREN IN THE NOT TOO DISTANT FUTURE. 
-6-
I HAVE DELIBERATELY LEFT UNTIL LAST ANY MENTION
OF THE'TASMAN BRIDGE ACCIDENT AND ITS AFTERMATH,
You WILL BE AWARE OF MY OWN DEEP CONCERN AT THE
EXTRAORDINARY MISHAP, AND THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT PLEDGED FULL AND READY CO-OPERATION
IN RESTORING THE TASMAN BRIDGE ITSELF ANb
MAKING GOOD THE LOSS AND DISRUPTION SUFFERED BY
PEOPLE ON BOTH SIDES OF THE DERWENT,
LEGISLATION WILL BE INTRODUCED SHORTLY PROBABLY
NEXT WEEK TO HONOUR FULLY AND PROMPTLY THE
UNDERTAKINGS WE HAVE GIVEN, UP TO $ 13 MILLION
WILL BE PROVIDED FOR WORKS NECESSARY TO RESTORE
THE BRIDGE ITSELF, AND TENDERS WILL SHORTLY
BE CALLED TO PROVIDE FOR THE CLEARING OF THE
WRECKAGE FROM THE VICINITY OF THE BRIDGE THUS
ALLOWING FURTHER EXAMINATION AND PLANNING FOR
RECONSTRUCTION TO BE CARRIED OUT, MR BARNARD
HAS APPROVED THE PROVISION, THROUGH THE ARMY,
OF SUFFICIENT BAILEY BRIDGE MATERIAL TO ALLOW
CONSTRUCTION OF A TEMPORARY BRIDGE UPSTREAM
TO CARRY ESSENTIAL COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, AND
CONSIDERATION IS BEING GIVEN TO THE PROVISION OF
A PERMANENT SECOND BRIDGE, 



ADDRESS 10 THE NATIOIN.
BY THE PRIME 1 INISTER,
MR, EG. W11r -LAM, m. P.,
SUNDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 1975
I want to speak tonight about some distrubing
developments in Australia's parliamentary system which
I am bound to say post as werious a threat to its
strenght and stability as we have ever encouintered in
our history. It's time to stop the rot. And that can really
be done only by the Australian people
Let me begin by stating a very general principle
about the working of our democracy. Our syster, depends very
heavily on custom, tradition, the unwritten rul~ es of the*
game. True, we have a written Constitution bul: the
Constitution itself is silent on many of the most important
and fundamental aspects of the working of our democracy.
The Constitution says nothing about rule by popular majority.
It says nothing about political parties. It says nothing about
freec'om of speech. Yet these are basic to how we govern
ourselves. The basis of our system the rule of law is
commion consent and comimonsense. In the ultimate, these are
the only guarantees against the fule of force.
When violence is done to an improtant convention,
a well-established custom, then violence is done to
demtocracy itself.
Last April, we had the unprecedented attempt by the
Opposition in the Senate to refuse Supply to the elected
Government that is, to deny the Government the money
it needs to carry out its duties. At the election which
followed, you were able to pass judgement on this -action.
You re-elected my Government for a further 3 years and
repudiated the action of the Opposition in the Senate.
That should have been the end of the matter. Yet almost
from the time the numbers we-: t up, the opposition has made no
secret of its intention to repeat the exercise if it can,
whenever it can. It confronts Australia with the prospect of
6-monthly national elections an impossible basis for
sound effective government.
This is a generalised threat to set aside the verdict
you recorded only last May. Now, only last week, we have a
clear specific threat to set aside a clear specific decision
made by the people of New South Wales.
In May. the people of the largest State voted in favour
of the Government team of the Senate candidates by a majority
of 50% as against 41.7% of the votes for the Opposition
candidates. / 2 
-2-
The Senator who headed the successful Senate team, Senator
L. K. Murphy I--as now been a-Fpoln., ted a Justice of the
High Court, the sixth Australi. an Attorney-General to be made
a judge by the Australian Government.-Mr. Justice
Hliggins, Mr. Justice Isaacs, Chief Justice Latham, Chief Judge
SpicE-r-and Chief Justice Barwick. incidentally, so far
this century 12 English Attorney-General have been appointed
Lords Chancellor, Lords Chief Justice or a Lord Justice of
Appeal.$ This is the 26th casual bacancy in the Senate
since proportional representation was introduced in 1949.
hitherto the States have filled every vacancy with a.
Senator who belongs to the smae political party as his
predecessor. In 10 of the 25 cases the new Senator for the
State was a political opponent of the government of the State.
The first casual vac * ancy was caused by the death of a
Labor senator for Western Australia in 1951. Th,. Liberal
Premi er of Western Australia, after consulting the Liberal
Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies and the other Premiers, sponsored a
Labor man to replace him. This practice has sence been scrupulously
followed in every State by every Premier, Liberal, Labor and
Country Party. In 1959 the Constitutional Review Committee, composed of
8 M. H. R. s and 4 Senators, 6 of them Labor, 4 Liberal and
2 Country Party, recorded that they were all strongly of the
view that, if the Senator for a State whose place has become vacant
was a member of a political party, the Parliament of the
State or the Governor of the State should be rqquired, in
filling the vacancy, to choose a person who was a member of
the same political party as the vacating senator.
Last rThursday the Senate unanimously carried this
resol ution: The Senate cornmends to the Parliaments of all
the States the practice which has prevailed since 1949 whereby
the States, when casual vacancies have occured, have
chosen a Senator front the same political party as the
senator who died or resigned.
This a good and very proper ruJle good in principle
and soun~ d in practice. Yet now the Premier of Ne wSouth
Wales proposed to scrap it. But it's not just a
convention, a custom he's throwing on the scrap-heap; it's the
wishes of the people of New South Wales, recorded only 9
months ago. The New South Wales proposal would make the senate
as a whole even less representative of the opinion of the
electors recorded in May. Instead of a Senate elected with
Twenty-nine Labor senators, twenty-nine Liberal and
Country Party senators and two Independent senatcrs there would
be only twenty-eight Labor senators. / 3 
I believe AutwIralians of all political persuasions
should be deeply concerned about these events and should
express their concern. Certainly the voters of New South
Wales who are about to be defrauded of their proper representation
have very right to be aggrieved. But it's not
only the majority who voted Labor who should feel
incensed. I've always believed Liberal supporters have a
deep commitmcnt to the prOper workings oE the Parliamentary
system. Certainly any other commitment should be
unthinkable for the party founded and led by Sir Robert
Menzies. It is to all those thus committed that I make my appeal
to express in whatever way you can to your mem srs of
Parliament to ensure that our parliamentary system shall be
given a chance to work.
I've mentioned to you many times over the past
year the unprecedented stresses that democracies and
parliaments everywhere are now experiencing. The real
difficulties are great enough without deliberate sabotage.
I leave you with this very earnest question: If men in
positions of power feel free to break the rules with
impunity, how long will those who feel disadvantaged or
deprived or denied of power play. to the rules? 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON, E. G, WHITLAM, 0, C. M. P.
TO THE TASMANIAN STATE A, L. P CONFERENCE
I_ AUNCESTON, 23 FE3,. PUARY L975
JUST OVER TWO WEEKS AGO WE ENDED A SUCCESSFUL
NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE PARTY IN TERRIGAL. THAT
CONFERENCE REKINDLED OUR SPIRITS AND STRENGTHENED OUR
DETERMINATION TO CARRY ON WITH LABOR'S PROGRAM AND PUT
US BACK ON THE ROAD TO VICTORY. YOU WILL REMEMBER THAT
OUR OPPONENTS PREDICTED ALL SORTS OF DISUNITY AND
DISSENSION IN TERRIGAL. IT WAS TO BE A CONFERENCE
STEEPED IN GLOOM AND WRACKED BY CRISIS. AND OF COURSE
IT WAS NOTHING OF THE SORT, AT TERRIGAL WE RALLIED
OUR STRENGTH AND GATHERED OUR RESOURCES TO MEET WHATEVER
CHALLENGES, WHATEVER THREATS, WHATEVER OBSTACLES MAY
FACE US . IN THE MONTHS AND YEARS AHEAD. FOR WE CAN NO
LONGER HAVE ANY ILLUSIONS ABOUT OUR OPPONENTS. THE
EVENTS IN THE TWO SHORT WEEKS SINCE TERRIGAL HAVE SHOWN
ONCE AGAIN HOW DESPERATE AND UNSCRUPULOUS THEY ARE. THEY
WILL NOT ACCEPT THE UMPIRE'S VERDICT AND THEY WILL NOT
ABIDE BY THE RULES OF THE GAME. ./ 2 
-2-
I TOLD THE DELEGATES AT TERRIGAL:
" WE NOW KNOW THAT OUR OPPONENTS WILL TEAR UIP THE
RULE BOOK AND WRITE NEW RULES WHENEVER THEY THINK IT
SUITS THEM." I HOW TRUE THOSE WORDS WERE SHOWN TO BE,
WITHIN DAYS THE LIBERAL PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HAD TORN ANOTHER PAGE FROM THE RULE BOOK. WE SAW THE
LENGTHS TO WHICH THE LIBERALS WOOLD GO TO OVERTHROW AN.
ELECTED GOVERNMENT, TO FRUSTRATE ITS PROGRAM, TO OBSTRUCT
THE PEOPLE IS WILL. WE KNOW THIS, AND IN EVERYTHING WE
DO, IN EVERYTHING WE SAY, WE MUST KEEP THIS. FACT , IN MIND.
OUR OPPONENTS ARE OUT TO DESTROY US BY ANY MEANS THEY
CAN. THE COMING YEAR WILL PUT ENORMOUS STRAINS ON OUR
RESOURCES, OUR ORGANISATION, OUR LOYALTY AND OUR VIGILANCE.
THIS TASMANIAN CONFERENCE IS THE FIRST STATE
CONFERENCE SINCE WE GATHERED OUR FORCES AND REDEDICATED
OUR EFFORTS'IN TERRIGAL. IT WILL CARRY FORWARD THE
MOMENTUM AND THE GREAT SPIRIT OF RESOLVE WHICH TERRIGAL
SET IN TRAIN.-OUR PARTY HAS A I) NIlAcqtRFITh IN
TASMANIA AND A REMARKABLE HOLD ON THE CO) NFIDENCE OF
TASMANIAN VOTERS. WIE HOLD ALL FIVE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVE
SEATS IN THI. S STATE. WE HAVE FIVE LABOR SENATORS. WE HAVE
A VIGOROUS STATE LABOR GOVERNMENT. ALL THESE ARE'TREMENDOUS
ASSETS AND A GREAT SOURCE OF STRENGTH AND CONFIDENCE FOR
THE PARTY AT THE STATE AND NATIONAL LEVELS. WE MUST'
DEFEND IT RESOLUTELY. I WANT THIS CONFERENCE FOR THE GOOD
OF THE WHOLE LABOR MOVEMENT -TO'CONSOLIDATE OUR UNITY AND
SAFEGUARD AND STRENGTHEN OUR DOMINANCE IN THIS STATE. ia/ 3 
-3-
LET'S BE QUITE CLEAR WHAT OUR OPPONENTS
ARE TRYING TO DO. THEY WANT TO DRAG THIS COUNTRY BACK
BACK TO THE STAGNATION AND COMPLACENCY THAT WE BROUGHT
TO AN-END AFTER 23 YEARS OF CONSERVATIVE RULE. THEY WANT
TO MAKE AUSTRALIA SAFE FOR THE FANATICS, THE STATES
RIGHTERS, THE REACTIONARIES, THE VESTED INTERESTS, THE
OVERSEAS COMPANIES WHO HAD IT SO GOOD FOR SO LONG.
THEY WANT TO TEAR DOWN OUR PLANS FOR BETTER SCHOOLS, OUR
PLANS FOR CHILDREN, MIGRANTS, WIDOWS, MOTHERS, ABORIGINES
OUR PLANS FOR UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE, FOR NATIONAL
COMPENSATION, FOR DECENT CITIES WITH DECENT TRANSPORT,
THE CLOSER THESE GOALS COME TO FRUITION THE. MORE DESPERATE
THEY ARE TO DESTROy THEM, THE NEARER WE GET TO MEDIBANK
OR A PROPER LEGAL AID SERVICE, OR AN EFFECTIVE' PETROLEUM
AND MINERALS AUTHORITY, THE MORE FRANTIC AND RUTHLESS ARE
THEIR METHODS. ANY TACTICS WILL DO FROM OBSTRUCTION
IN THE SENATE TO Oi1STRUCTION I,'' THE COJRT3
OF COURSE THEY ARE COY ABOUT WHAT THEY
WOULD DO THEMSELVES. ONLY LAST WEEK, IN AN UNGUARDED
MOMENTMR. SNEDDEN LET SLIP ONE OF THE LIBERALS.' LESS
ATTRACTIVE PROMISES THE RESTORATION OF FEES FOR
TERTIARY EDUCATION AND A CUTBACK IN STUDENT ALLOWANCES.
THAT'S THE SORT OF LIBERAL ECONOMY MEASURE THE YOUTH OF
AUSTRALIA COULD EXPECT. BUT THE LIBERAL AXE WOULD FALL
MUCH WIDER THAN THAT. IT WOULD CHOP RUTHLESSLY INTO THE
CONSUMPTION AND LIVING STANDARDS OF THE POOR AND
UNORGANISED. WE KNOW WHO WOULD PAY THE PRICE FOR THE
RESTORATION OF SO-CALLED LIBERAL ' PROSPERITY' EVERY WAGE
EARNER, EVERY EMPLOYEE, EVERY PENSIONER, EVERY WORKING MAN
AND HIS FAMILY. 
-4-
HERE IN TASMANIA YOU HAVE HAD VIVID EVIDENCE IN
RECENT WEEKS OF THE CONTEMPT WITH WHICH OUR OPPONENTS
TREAT THIS STATE, TASMANIA HAS BECOME THE LATEST
COCKPIT FOR COALITION SQUABBLES AND PERSONAL FEUDS, THE
HAI-RED AND BITTERNESS AMONG THE FORCES OF THE RIGHT IS
NEVER SO EVIDENT AS WHEN THEY FIGHT AMONG THEMSELVES.
FIRST WE HAD .' ENATOR TOWNLEY SHEDDING HIS THREADBARE
MAiNTLE OF INDEPENDENCE AND EMERGING IN HIS OLD LIBERAL
COLOURS. FOR THIS. IT SEEMS, HE WILL BE REWARDED WITH
FIRST PLACE ON THE NEXT LIBERAL SENATE TICKET, I CAN
ONLY SAY THAT HE HAS MANAGED 1O CONCEAL HIS INDEPENDENCE
VERY WELL IN RECENF MONTHS.
THEN WE HAD THE CELEBRATED VISIT BY BJELKE-PETERSEN
TO TASMANIA IN AN ATTEMPT TO RESUSCITATE THE NATIONAL
PARTY. HE AND , R A'ITHONY MADE IT A TWO-NAN CRUSADE.
THEY HAD A DUSTY RECEPTION FROM THE LIBERAL LEADER IN THIS
STATE, WHO ACCUSED THE COUNTRY PARTY OF " EMPIRE-BUILDING" lei
AND WENT ON AT LENGTH ABOUT ITS " UNSAVOURY PAST".
BJELKE-PETERSEN SPENT SEVERAL DAYS IN TASMANIA PROCLAIMING
THE BENEFITS HIS PARTY WOULD BRING. TifEI HE RETURNED TO
QUEENSLAND AND THREATENED THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT WITH
REPRISALS UNLESS THEY STOPPED. BUYING BEEF FROM TASMANIA,
YOU WILL REMEMBER HIS WORDS ON AN INTERVIEW ON THE ABC
LAST MONDAY: " JAPAN SHOULD THINK IN TERMS OF THEIR GOOD
FRIENDS AND GOOD CUSTOMERS IN THIS AREA WHERE THEY BUY
THESE VAST QUANTITIES OF COAL THAT IS SO VITAL TO THEM
THEY SHOULD THINK OF US TO BUY THEIR MEAT, NOT NEW
ZEALAND AND NOT TASMANIA. THAT IS THE MESSAGE I'M
TRYING TO GET OVER TO THEM.", 
AND THAT'S THE BJELKE-PETERSEN MESSAGE TO
TASMANIA: JAPAN SHOULDN'T BUY BEEF FROM FOREIGN
COUNTRIES LIKE TASMANIA AND NEW ZEALAND: I MUST SAY
I WAS RELIEVED WHEN IR SNEDDEN CONDEMNED THE 9UEENSLAND
PREMIER IN THE SAME, BRAVE FORTHRIGHT AND PRINCIPLED FASHION
THAT HE CONDEMNED THE LEWIS TACTICS IN NEW SOUTH ' JALES.
SO THESE ARE THE MEN WHO OPPOSE US. WE ARE
DEALING WITH MEN WHO WILL SCRAP THE RULES WHEN IT
SUITS THEM, MEN WHO WILL CHEERFULLY THREATEN THE WHOLE BASIS
OF OUR DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM, MEN WHO CARE NOTHING FOR THE
SENSITIVE CONVENTIONS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE., MEN WHO WILL
JEOPARDISE AUSTRALIA'S STANDING ABROAD FOR
A QUICK POLITICAL ADVANTAGE, MEN TOO WEAK TO BRING THEIR
FOLLOWERS INTO LINE OR DEFEND A COURSE OF ACTION WHICH
THEY KNOW IS RIGHT.
WIE HAVE HAD ANOTHER GOOD EXAMPLE OF THEIR DESPERATION1
IN RECENT WEEKS. THE LIBERAL GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA,
CASTING OFF THE TRENDY IMAGE WHICH ONCE SERVED ITS
PURPOSES, HAS MOUNTED A HIGH COURT CHALLENGE TO TWO OF
OUR CURREHI PROGRAMS THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DFVELOPMENT
SCHEME AND THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN. l OF COURSE
THESE PROGRAMS ARE OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THEMSELVES,
AS PIONEER ATTEMPTS TO INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN
EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THEIR WELFARE. BUT THE VICTORIAN
CHALLENGE, SUPPORTED BY OTHER LIBERAL STATES, DOESN'T JUST
JEOPARDISE LABOR'S PROGRAMS: IT THREATENS LEGISLATION ON
A RANGE OF MATTERS WHICH HAS STOOD FOR 22 YEARS OR MORE. 
IT WILL JEOPARDISE SCHEMES WHICH WERE ORIGINALLY
AUTHORISED BY THE PREVIOUS LIBERAL-COUNTRY PARTY GOVERNMENTSGRANTS
TO THE BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE, PROJECTS IN THE
FIELD OF MEDICAL RESEARCH AND CHILD CARE, PAYMENTS UNDER
THE NATIONAL APPRENTICESHIP SCHEME, GRANTS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL SERVICE.
IT'S WOR-DiLISTING THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INITIATIVES WHOSE EXISTENCE OF LEGAL STANDING ARE
THREATENED BY THIS CHALLENGE. THEY INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:
ASSISTANCE FOR ISOLATED CHILDREN, PRE-SCHOOL TEACHER
EDUCATION ALLOWANCE 1 COMMONWEALTH TECHNICAL SCHOLARSHIPS,'
GRANTS UNDER THE NEW PROGRAM FOR CHILD CARE AND PRE-SCHOOL
EDUCATION, NATIONAL APPRENTICESHIP SCHEMES, GRANTS TO
COMMUNITY-AGENCIES INVOLVED IN MIGRAN'T WELFARE, LOCAL AID
FOR ABORIGINALCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, PROTECTION OF
ABORIGINAL SACRED SITES, ABORIGINAL COMMUNITY ENTERPR-ISES1
AGED PERSONS' HOMES AND HOSTELS, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT
ASSISTANCE, HANDICAPPED CHILDREN'I S ASSISTANCE, HOMELESS
PERSONS' ASSISTANCE, MEALS ON WHEELS, HOME NURSING
SUBSIDIES, NURSING HOMES IASSISTANCE AND MANY MORE.
IN ALL, SOME 56 SEPARATE PROGRAMS OF ASSISTANCE FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT COULD BE AFFECTED IF THE CHALLENGE
SUCCEEDS. IN THE'LONG HISTORY OF LIBERAL OBSTRUCTION,
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER EXAMPLE OF FANATICISM AND
BLOODYMINDEDNESS THAN A LEGAL CHALLENGE WHICH THREATENS,
NOT ONLY LABOR PROGRAMS, BUT MANY OF THE THINGS THE LIBERALS
STARTED THEMSELVES. 
WHEN WE LOOK BACK ON THE MANY REFORMS AND
ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT, THERE IS ONE
THING WE CAN LOOK TO WITH THE GREATEST PRIDE. WE HAVE
BROUGHT ABOUT A MARKED SHIFT IN THE WEALTH OF THIS
COUNTRY. REAL LIVING STANDARDS FOR THE WAGE-EARNERESPECIALLY
THOSE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SCALE -HAVE BEEN
RAISED AS NEVER BEFORE. THIS FACT MORE THAN ANYTHING
ELSE THIS RAPID INCREASE IN THE SHARE OF GNP GOING
TO WAGES AND SALARIES 15 INTOLERABLE TO OUR OPPONENTS.
IN OUR FIRST TWO YEARS IN OFFICE AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS
INCREASED By 40% 7 AGAINST AN INCREASE IN THE CONSUMER PRICE
INDEX OF 30%. MINIMUM AWARD RATES FOR MEN-INCREASED BY
47% AND FOR WOMEN BY NO LESS THAN 70%. REAL AVERAGE
WEEKLY EARNINGS AFTER TAX HAVE GONE UP
ISHALL HAVE MORE TO SAY ABOUT THE LONG-TERM
IMPLICATION8 Of THIS TREND, BUT THE FACT REMAINS THAT* THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS LOOKED AFTER THE OPLE W'HO NEED Us.
AND THERE IS ANOTHER THING; WE HAVE LOOKED AFTER THOSE WHO
CAN'T SPEAK UP FOR THEMSELVES. KNOW THE MIDDLE CLASS
AND THE LABOUR UNIONS CAN PROTECT. THEIR INTERESTS BECAUSE,
IN THE LAST RESORT, THEY CAN ORGANISEi THEIR STRENGTHS AND
ARTICULATE THEIR DEMANDS. THE ABORIGINES, THE MIGRANTS"
THE WIDOWS, THE DESERTED CHILDREN, THE PENSIONERS, ARE
NOT SO FORTUNATE. THEY ARE NOT SO VOCAL. THEY ARE NOT
SO ORGANISED. THEY NEED A GOVERNMENT THAT WILL HEED
THEIR PROBLEMS AND SAFEGUARD THEIR NEEDS. AND IT IS BECAUSE
WE HAVE DONE SO THAT VAST NUMBERS OF FORGOTTEN'PEOPLE,
NEGLECTED AND UNDERPRIVILEGED PEOPLE, HAVE HAD A BETTER DEAL. 
-8-
THE LIBERALS KNOW THIS. AND THEY KNOW WHEN
PEOPLE FEEL THE BENEFITS OF OUR PROGRAMS, THE REA\ L GAINS
IN THEIR LIVING STANDARDS, ALL THE LIBERAL TALK ABOUT
CENTRALISM, STATE RIGHTS AND THE CONSTITUTION WILL BE
REVEALED FOR THE CLAPTRAP IT IS. YOU HEAR A LOT ABOUT
LABOR ATTACKS ON THE FEDERAL SYSTEM.* HERE IN TASMANIA
THE SMALLEST STATE, YOU HAVE A SPECIAL PLACE IN THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM, A SPECIAL CONCERN TO ENSURE THAT THE
SYSTEM OPERATES TO YOUR ADVANTAGE. IASK: WHO IS
MORE CONCERNED TO MAKE THE SYSTEM WORK THOSE.: WHO WANT
TO PRESERVE ITS MANIFEST INADEQUACIES OR THOSE WHO WORK TO
IMPROVE IT? IHAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE FEDERAL SYSTEM
CAN WORK BUT IKNOW IT WILL WORK BEST WHEN WE ESTABLISH
THE RIGHT BALANCE BETWEEN THE THREE TIERS OF GOVERNMENTLOCAL1
STATE AND NATIONAL. THAT IS WHAT WE ARE DOING.
THE LESSON OF THE PAST DECADE THE LESSON TO BE DRAWN
FROM OUR OWN'ELECTORAL SUCCESSES -, IS THAT MANY OF OUR'
PRESSING PROBLEMS DEPEND ON A GREATER INVOLVEMENT BY THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.-I HAVE POINTED OUR THAT IN THE TWO
AUSTRALIAN STATES WITH THE LARGEST POPULATIONS, IT WAS
OBVIOUS THAT ONLY THROUGH THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT COULD THE PEOPLE BE PROVIDED WITH ESSENTIAL PUBLIC
SERVICES LIKE. HEALTH, TRANSPORT AND EDUCATION. INIHE
STATES WITH THE LARGEST AREAS ONLY THE. NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
COULD SAFEGUARD AUSTRALIAN CONTROL. OF. THE VAST NEW NATURAL
RESOURCES DISCOVERED IN THE LAST 10 YEARS. 841/ 9 
-9-
IN TASMANIA, WHO BUT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENJT COULD DO
ANYTHING ABOUT YOUR SHIPPING AND RAILWAYS? ONLY AN
A\ USTR~ ALIAN LABoi? GOVLRiimiFNT HAS THE WILL, THlE RESOURCES,
f 1-IE AUTH~ OiRITY TO-DEVELOP THF: A. N. L. ArmIF THE_ NATIONAL
RAILWAYS. ONLY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CA N RELIEVE YOUR
STATE GOVERNMENT OF THE CRIPPLING COSTS-OF ITS RAILWAY
SERVICES. AND WE HAVE MADE GREAT PROGRESS TOWARDS THAT
GOAL-IN THE PAST FEW DAYS.
LABOR HAS-A GOOD RECORD IN TASMANIA -A RECORD OF
POSITIVE ACHIEVEMENT AND WE SHOULD MAKE-SURE THE PEOPLE
ARE AWARE OF IT. CERTAINLY WE HAVE A S PECIAL PROBLEM
WITH UNEMPLOYMENT WHICH IS HIGHER THAN THE NATIONAL
-AVERAGE. BUT OUR MEASURES HAVE BEEN DESIGNED TO TACKLE
UNEMPLOYMENT NATr 0ONALLY AS WELL AS REGIONALLY. THE
GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR TASMANIA THAN ANY GOVERNMENT
BEFORE US. WE HAVE BEEN UNSTINTINGLY GENEROUS IN OUR
FINANCIAL PAYMENTS. OUR GENERAL PURPOSE REVENUE4
ASSISTANCE To TASMANIA-AMOUNTED TO $ 131 MILLION IN OUR
LAST BUDGET 31.6% MORE THAN 1973-74, SPECIAL PURPOSE
PAYMENTS FOR UNIVERSITIES, HOSPITALS AND THE LIKE HAVE
SHOW4N AN EVEN MORE SPECTACULAR RISE. THEY AMOUNTED TO
$ 109 MILLION IN OUR LAST BUDGET 80% MORE THAN THE YEAR
BEFORE. AND BEAR IN MIND THAT OUR PAYMENTS IN rHE
PREVIOLUS BUDGET WERE THEMSELVES FAR IN. EXCESS OF ANYTHING
PROVIDED BY OUR PREDECESSORS. SO WE HAVE NOTHING TO
APOLOGISE FOR IN OUR FINANCIAL TREATMENT OF TASMANIA.
EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD IN THIS STATE RECEIVES AN
ESTIMATED $ 790 PER HEAD FROM THiE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
COMPARED WITH $ q66 PER HEAD FOP. THE SIX STATES COMBINED. 
Ah) THESE FIGURES TAKE NO ACCOUNT OF THFI ADDITIONAL
FUNDS GRANTED TO [ ASMANIA AT THE PREMIER'S CONFERENCE
LAST FRIDAY WEEK,
THE MESSAGE WE MUST KEEP IN MIND IS -THIS: WE MUST
NEVER ALLOW THE THUGS AND WRECKERS IN THE OPPOSITION TO
RATTLE US OR SHAKE OUR NERVE, THERE IS A CONSTANT ATTEMPT
TO DO SO IN THE MEDIA, FROM THE MORE STRIDENT VESTED
INTERESTS, FROM THEIR SUPPORTERS IN PARLIAMENT, I KNOW WITH
OUR PROBLEMS OFINFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT, AND WITH
THESE CONSTANT THREATS OF AN ELECTION, WE CAN EASILY LOSE
HEART. BUT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE KNOW THAT WE ARE NOT
ALONE WITH INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT THEY KNOW THAT ALL
THE WORLD'S MIXED ECONOMIES, ALL THE WORLD'S INDUSTRIALISED
COUNTRIES, ALL OUR TRADING PARTNERS ARE SHARING THE SAME
EXPERIENCE. MANY OF THEM ARE MUCH WORSE OFF THAN WE ARE.
INDEED, ON MY RECENT VISIT TO EUROPE I CONCLUDED THATAUSTRALIA'S
ECONOMY IS BASICALLY MUCH SOUNDER THAN THOSE
OF MOST OF THE COUNTRIES I VISITED, 1lO SENSIBLE PERSON,
IN AUSTRALIA OR ABROAD, IMAGINES FOR A MOMENT THAT
UNFMPLOYMENT OR INFLATIO14 WOULD 12E ANY iETTIER IN AUSTRAL! A
TODAM UNDER A SNEDDEN-/\ N[ HONY GOVERNMENT. THEY WOULD
ALMOST CERTAINLY BE WORSE, MR ANTHONY WOULD SEE THAT PETROL
PRICES WERE A GOOD DEAL HIGHER FOR A START. MANY OF OUR
MEASURES TO RELIEVE UNEMPLOYMENT AND RESTRAIN PRICES
THE THE R. ED. S. SCHEME, WAGE IJDEXATION WOULD
BE SCRAPPED OUT OF HAND, .,/ ii1 
Il-
THELRE I S GOOD R FASOH TO H OPE TIHAT OUR ECONOMI C
CONDITIONS WILL SOON BEGIN TO IMPROVE. lIN SAYING THIS
I DONAl WANT TO RAISE UNDUE HOPES OR GENER~ ATE COMPLACENCY.
WIE LIVE IN. TIMES OF RAPID AND SOMETIMES UNPREDICTABLE
CHANGCE, BUT I AM CONFID: ENT THAT OUR RECENT CCONOMIC
MEASURES WILL SHORTLY SHOW THEIR EFFECTS. LATER THIS
YEAR WE CAN EXPECT SOME MARKED IMPROVEMENT IN THE
LACOUJR MARKET. THE IMPORTANT THING FOR US AND OUR PARTY
SUPPORTERS TO BEAR IN MMII) ISA HAT THIS IMPROVEMENT CAN
ONLY BE SUSTAINED IF WAGE-EARNERS EXERCISE RESPONSIBILITY
INJ THEIR PAY CLAIMS. IKNOW THERE ARE SECTIONS OF THE
LABOR MOVEMENT WHO ARE RELUCTANT TO FACE THIS FACT.
THEY ARE QUITE OBSTINATE IN IGNORING IT. I SHALL NJOT
MINCE WORDS. THE TRUTH IS THAT WE CANNOT AFFORD WAGE
GAINS IN THE YEAR AHEAD LIK( E THOSE IN THE YEAR JUST PAST.
IDON'T TAKE ANY PLEASURE IN POINTING THIS OUT, ISTATE
IT AS A FACT. WAGE EARNERS HAVE MADE UNPRECENDENTED GAINS
IN THE PAST YEAR. IF WE WANT TO PRESERVE THE REAL
VAL. UE OF THOSE GAINS, IF WE WANT TO BUIlD ON THE
ACHIEVEMENTS WE HAVE MADE TOGETHER, IF WE WANT TO PREPARE
THE GOUND FOR FURTIIER GAINS IN FUTURE YEARS, WE CANNOT
PUSH THlE SYSTEM TOO FAR TOO FAST. IF &amp; I OVERLOAD
OUR DEMANDS AT PRESENT WE RUN THE RISK OF CANCELLING
OUT OUR GAINS. WE WILL CERTAINLY POSE A THREAT TO
THE GOhVERNMENT'S SURVIVAL WHENEVER THE IJEXT ELECTION
COMES. 
-12-
DON'T FORGET THAT OUR TAX CUTS ARE MAKING IT
MUCH EASIER FOR THE WORKING MAN AND GIVING THE GREATEST
BENEFIT TO WAGE EARNERS WHO NEED IT MOST. OUR OPPONENTS HAVE
BEEN IN A LATHER OF INDIGNATION ABOUT SOME OF THE LURKS
AND CONCESSIONS WE HAVE CUT. TAKE OUR REDUCTION IN EDUCATION
EXPENSES, A DEDUCTION OF $ 400 BENEFITS A MINORITY OF PEOPLE
WHO LEAST NEED HELP. ALWAYS WITH SUCH CONCESSIONS THE
MAN ON THE HIGHEST INCOME RECEIVES THE GREATEST BENEFIT.
I SUPPOSE THAT OF ALL THE PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM I WOULD HAVE
THE HIGHEST SALARY. I COULD -AFFORD TO SPEND MORE ON MY
CHILDREN'S EDUCATION THAN ANYONE ELSE. WOULD ANYONE
CONSIDER IT JUST AND PROPER ON THAT ACCOUNT THAT I SHOULD
ALSO GET THE GREATEST BENEFIT IN TAX CONCESSIONS FROM
MY EDUCATION EXPENSES?
TASMANIA HAS HAD AMPLE PROOF OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
CONCERN FOR ITS PEOPLE. WE HAVE GIVE! J SPECIA. L IFLP TO
IASIANIA'S AGRICU! LTURAL INDUSTRIES AND MADE SPECIAL EFFORTS
TO IMPROVE TRANSPORT LINKS WITH THE MAINLAND. OUR RESPONSE
TO THE TASMAN BRIDGE DISASTER WAS PROMPT, EFFICIENT AND
GENEROUS. THE OBJECT OF ALL OUR REFOPMS, ALL OUR
PROGRAMS, . IS TO ENSURE THAT THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIANS
TO LEAD RICH AND FULFILLING LIVES ARE MADE MORE ABUNDANT
AhD MORE EQUAL. IN TASMANIA YOU FACE SPECIAL PROBLEMS
BECAUSE OF YOUR STATE'S SIZE AND ISOLATION. NO ONE IN
TASMANIA Si OUIlD SUFFER ON THAT ACCOUNF. I BE IFVE ', OUR
CONFEREI. CE W; L, BRING ; S CLOSER in THE ACHIEVEMENT OF OUR
GOALS, AND ENA. BLE OUR TWO LABOR ' iOVEPr'MEN i S IN HOBART AND
CANDERRA TO CO-OPERATE IN FURTHER EFFORTS FOR THE oENEFIT
OF TiE PEOi'L. E OF TASMANIA AND OUR NATION.
* t . I'c 



lOpfl
THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE SYDNEY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, WENTWORTH HOTEL, SYDNEY,
FRIDAY, 28 FEBRUARY, 1975. 4
IT IS MORE THAN SEVEN YEARS AGO SINCE I FIRST
ADDRESSED, AS LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, A
MAJOR CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, NOT SYDNEY BUT MELBOURNE, IN
OCTOBER 1968y .1 HAD THE REPORTS OF MY SPEECH LOOKED UPx
SI FOUND THAT MY THEME ON THAT OCCASION WAS THE SAME AS I
HAD PLANNED TO TAKE WITH YOU TODAY, I SAID THEN SEVEN
YEARS AGO " THE PROGRAM OF REFORM AND DEVELOPMENT OF
ANY FUTURE LABOR GOVERNMENT CANNOT BE FULFILLED WITHOUT
PROSPERITY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR."' AND I[ SAID
S '; PRIVATE ENTERPRISE IN AUSTRALIA CANNOT PROSPER WITHOUT
GOVERNMENT -INITIATIVES PARTICULARLY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL, " x
I MADE THOSE STATEMENTS SEVEN YEARS AGO AND I REPEAT THEM
O TODAYX, I DON'T RECALL THESE STATEMENTS JUST TO PROVE A
CONSISTENCY, I RECALL THEM BECAUSE IT'S TOO OFTEN IGNORED
THAT THIS APPROACH, THIS RECOGNITION OF THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OF OUR PROGRAM AND PRIVATE PROSPERITY, ISA FUNDAMENTAL
PART OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN OR
OUT OF OFFICEk SEVERAL MINISTERS IN MY GOVERNMENT, IN
PARTICULAR THE TREASURER AND I, HAVE IN RECENT WEEKS BEEN
EMPHASISING THE NEED TO RAISE PROFITABILITY. IN THE PRIVATE
SECTORx 1 
-2-
IN SOME QUARTERS THIS HAS BEEN DEPICTED AS A REVERSE,
IN OTHER QUARTERS AS A CONVERSION SOME MIGHT HOPE A
DEATH-BED REPENTANCE, IT IS NOTHING OF THE SORT. IT
EXPRESSES A VIEW I HAVE BEEN PUTTING, AS I HAVE JUST
EVER SINCE I BECAME LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTYx OUR CURRENT EMPHASIS ON PROFITABILITY REFLECTS
A RESPONSE WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF A CONSISTENT PHILOSOPHY
TO THE PARTICULAR NEED OF THE PARTICULAR TIME. WE HAVE
NEVER LOST SIGHT OF THAT INTERDEPENDENCE, OF WHICH I
HAVE JUST SPOKEN, JUST AS WE HAVE NEVER LOST SIGHT OF OUR
GOALS FOR AUSTFALIAx As I* AM RECALLING PAST SPEECHES I
CAN DONO BETTER THAN REFER TO THE FIRST MAJOR SPEECH I
MADE AS PRIME MINISTER TO A REPRESENTATIVE CROSS SECTION
OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS AT A METAL TRADES INDUSTRIES
ASSOCIATION SEMINAR IN JUNE 1973x I SAID, ". THE ASSURANCE
I GIVE YOU IS THAT WE FULLY RECOGNISE THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE BUSINESS. I ACKNOWLEDGED
IN MY POLI. CY SPEECH THAT WE COULD NOT EXPECT THAT OU. R
SOCIAL PROGRAM COULD BE FINANCED WITHOUT A SIGNIFICANTLY A
INCREASED GROWTH RATEx AUSTRALIA HAD BEEN STUMBLING
ALONG WITH A PALTRY GROWTH RATE OF 3 PER CENT OR SO. I
SAID THEN THAT WE WOULD NEED TO ACHIEVE A GROWTH RATE OF
6 TO 7 P'ER CENT IF OUR PROGRAM WA8. TO BE IMPLEMENTED
WITHOUT VASTLY INCREASED TAXATION.* WE SHALL PROBABLY
ACHIEVE A RATE HIGHER THAN 7 PER CENT THIS YEAR,, WE CAN
ONLY ACHIEVE SUCH A RATE IF ALL SECTORS OF THE COMMUNITY,
NOT LEAST THE PRIVATE SECTOR, IS PROSPEROUS, EFFICIENT
AND FULLY EMPLOYEDx -I 4 
-3-
" You NEED A PROSPEROUS ECONOMYw So DO Ix. I KNOW VERY
WELL I CANNOT ACHIEVE A MOIETY OF WHAT I WANT TO ACHIEVE
FOR THE PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY DECENT SCHOOLS, DECENT
HOSPITALS, DECENT CITIES, DECENT PROVISION FOR THE SICK*
THE AGED AND THE HANDICAPPED WITHOUT YOUR PROSPERITY"
YOU MIGHT SAY THAT OUR PRESENT EMPHASIS ON THE
PRIVATE SECTOR AND OUR PRESENT PREOCCUPATION WITH THE
PROBLEMS OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR REPRESENT A PROFOUND CHANGE
OF PHILOSOPHYx I THINK I. AM ENTITLED TO SAY THAT IT
DOES NOT, BUT THAT IT DOES REPRESENT AN INTELLIQENT CHANGE
OF EMPHASIS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING SITUATIONI IT WOULD BE
INTOLERABLE IF IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES PREVAILING THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD TODAY, GOVERNMENTS WERE TO BE ACCUSED OF
ERRATIC CONDUCT, OF RECKLESS CHOP-AND-CHANGE BECAUSE THEY
TAKE NEW INITIATIVES OR ABANDON POLICIES APPROPRIATE TO
OTHER CONDITIONS. IT WOULD BE INTOLERABLE IF GOVERNMENTS
WERE TO BE'SCARED OFF FROM MAKING CHANGES BY SUCH
ACCUSATIONSx THE FACT IS THAT CHANGE IS OCCURRING WITH
A GREATER SPEED THAN EVER BEFORE, AND ALL GOVERNMENTS
HAVE TO MAKE CHANGES WITH GREATER SPEED AND FREQUENCY THAN
EVER BEFOREx IT APPEARS THAT THERE HAS BEEN A PROFOUND
ALTERATION IN THE NATURE OF THE BUSINESS CYCLE, NOT ONLY
IN AUSTRALIA. BUT THROUGHOUT THE WORLDx NOT SO LONG AGO
IT TOOK THE BUSINESS CYCLE ABOUT FIVE OR SEVEN YEARS TO
OCCUR IN ALL COMPARABLE COUNTRIES, -NOW THE FULL CYCLE
TAKES A COUPLE OF YEARSx 4* 
ACCORDINGLY, THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS FOR GOVERNMENTS
AND FOR BUSINESS ALIKE IS SUBJECT TO QUITE EXTRAORDINARY
AND UNPRECEDENTED STRAINS) NONE OF US IN OUR LIFE-TIMES
HAVE-EVER BEFORE FACED THIS CONTINUING NEED FOR
RE-ADJUSTMENT OF POLICIES AND PLANS FOR WHICH THE NEW
PHENOMENON OF A TWO YEAR BUSINESS CYCLE IMPOSES ON ALL OF
US, WE'VE ALL BEEN CALLED UPON TO* CHANGE THE DIRECTION OF
POLICIES AND PLANS MORE FULLY AND FREQUENTLY THAN EVER
BEFOREx IT IS EASY ENOUGH TO BLAME GOVERNMENTS FOR* THIS
CHANGE AND IT IS EASY ENOUGH, I SUPPOSE, FOR PEOPLE IN
GOVERNMENT TO BLAME THE PRIVATE SECTORx I THINK, HOWEVER,
IT IS TIME. WE ALL ROSE ABOVE A DEBATE WHICH MERELY SEEKS
TO ALLOCATE BLAMEx THERE IS VERY OFTEN A'NEED' ON BOTH
SIDES FOR PLAIN SPEAKING
UNPALATABLE FACTSx FOR EXAMPLE, IT GIVES ME NO
PARTICULAR PLEASURE TO GO TO A LABOR PARTY CONFERENCE AND
POINT OUT THE PRESENT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WAGE INCREASES
AND INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENTx BUT A STATEMENT OF PLAIN
FACT SHOULD NOT BE DESCRIBED AS UNION BASHING JUST AS WHEN
I STATE FACTSWHICH MAY BE UNPALATABLE TO YOU, I DON'T
EXPECT TO BE ACCUSED OF BUSINESS BASHINGA IN RECENT
MONTHS WE HAVE LAID THE FOUNDATIONS, AS A GOVERNMENT, FOR
A NEW DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS.
WE WANT TO BUILD ONTHESE FOUNDATIONS TO ESTABLISH HEALTHY
COMMUNICATION TO USE THE DIPLOMATIC CLICHE FULL AND
FRANK EXCHANGE" x 8 
IT IS POSSIBLY TRUE THAT IN THE PAST THE GOVERNMENT
HAS OVER-ESTIMATED THE FLEXIBILITY OF INDUSTRY TO
-ADJUST TO CHANGEA IT IS PROBABLY EQUALLY TRUE THAT
THE PJRIVATE SECTOR HAS UNDER-ESTIMATED THE GOVERNMENT'S
OWN FLEXIBILITY. WE SHOULD ALL TRY TO UNDERSTAND TE FORCES
WHICH MAKE FOR UNCERTAINTY IN THIS NEW ERA OF CHANGE IN
WHICH WE LIVE, THE FIRST FACTOR IS THE EXTRAORDINARY
INFLATIONARY FORCES PREVAILING THROUGHOUT THE WESTERN
WORLD IN RECENT YEARS FORCES WELL UNDER WAY BEFORE.
THE OIL CRISISA THERE HAVE BEEN QUITE FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGES IN SOCIAL ATTITUDES., CHANGES IN PEOPLE'S
EXPECTATIONS, CHANGES IN PEOPLE S PATIENCE IN ACHIEVING
THEIR EXPECTATIONSx THERE HAVE ALSO BEEN CHANGES IN
BASIC INDUSTRIAL ATTITUDES, THINGS LIKE THE GROWTH OF
SHOP-FLOOR MILITANCY AND A tHALLENGE TO TRADITIONAL
CONCEPTS OF UNION LEADERSHIP.
THE UNCERTAINTY OF THE TIMES IT SHOULD-ALSO REFLECT
THAT GOVERNMENT DECISION-MAKING IS SUBJECT TO THE SAME
PRESSURES, THE SAME UNCERTAINTIESx IT'S POINTLESS TO
BLAME GOVERNMENTS FOR THOSE UNCERTAINTIES WITH WHICH
GOVERNMENTS THEMSELVES HAVE TO GRAPPLE JUST AS'MUCH AS
BUSINESS)( 
-6-
I HAVE BEEN AT SOME PAINS TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MAY HAVE GIVEN RISE TO SOME
MISUNDERSTANDING BETWEEN BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT IN THE
PAST'FEW YEARSK PERHAPS THE FIRST FACTOR WAS THE MERE
FACT THAT WE HAD BEEN OUT FOR 23 YEARSK THERE WERE FEW
BUSINESSMEN WHO HAD ANY EXPERIENCE OF LABOR I'N GOVERNMENT
AND THERE WERE NOT MANY WELL ESTABLISHED LINES OF
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN BUSINESS AND THE LABOR PARTYX
UNDOUBTEDLY THERE WERE UNFOUNDED PRECONCEPTIONS AND
PREJUDICES ON BOTH SIDESK
WITH THIS BACKGROUND IT IS PERHAPS NOT SURPRISING
THAT COMMUNICATION WAS OFTEN INEFFECTIVEA ANOTHER FACTOR
WAS THE ENTHUSIASM AND THE SENSE OF MISSION OF THE NEW
GOVERNMENTX IT MAY BE THAT BUSINESS WAS SURPRISED THAT
WE MEANT WHAT WE HAD SAID4 THE BROAD RANGE OF POLICY
INITIATIVES . AND CHANGES WHICH WE INITIATED AT FIRST
EXHILARATED MOST PEOPLE, IF ONLY BY INVIDIOUS COMPARISON 4
WITH THE STAGNATION OF PREVIOUS YEARS CONTINUATION OF
THESE INITIATIVES AND CHANGES BECAME DIFFICULT TO ABSORBA
I CONCEDE THAT IT BECAME DIFFICULT TO KEEP UP WITH THE\.
SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF OUR POLICIES.' S, ,7/ S 
-7-
THE SCOPE AND SPEED OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
DECISIONS HAVE MADE IT DIFFICULT FOR PEOPLE TO ACQUIRE
A DEFINITE PERSPECTIVE OF THEGOVERNMENT'S OVERALL
PROGRAM AND INTENTIONSx IN THIS CONTEXT IT WAS EASY FOR
PEOPLE TO GENERALISE A VERY SPECIFIC GRIEVANCE OR REACT
ON THE BASIS OF TRADITIONAL PREJUDICES ABOUT THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTYx I HAVE OFTEN DETECTED A VIEW
AMONGST THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY THAT LABOR PARTY POLICY
HAD CONSPIRATORIAL OVERTONESK SOME HAVE BELIEVED THAT
WHILST PUBLIC STATEMENTS OF LABOR SPOKESMEN HAVE BEEN
EMINENTLY RESPONSIBLE, SOMEHOW LURKING IN THE MINDS OF
MEMBERS OF THE PARTY WAS A SECRET DESIRE TO CONTROL
EVERYTHING BY OUTRIGHT NATIONALISATION OR BY STEALTHx IT
IS PERTINENT TO NOTE THAT DURING THE PERIOD OF THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT THERE HAS BEEN NO INITIATIVE TO NATIONALISE
ANY INDUSTRYx THERE WILL NOT BE. WE HAVE TAKEN STEPS
TO PROVIDE PUBLIC SECTOR COMPETITION IN AREAS HITHERTO
EXCLUSIVELY PROVIDED FROM THE PRIVATE SECTORx ' 4.
FOR AS LONG AS I HAVE BEEN A MEMBER OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, IT HAS BEEN COMMITTED TO THE
CONTINUATION OF A MIXED ECONOMYx CLEARLY WE WANT
GREATER PUBLIC INITIATIVES THAN OUR OPPONENTSx BUT THE
CONTINUANCE OF THE'MIXED ECONOMY HAS NOT BEEN SERIOUSLY
QUESTIONED FOR MANY YEARSx IT IS TRUE THAT THE ROLE OF
PROFITS HAS NOT BEEN PART OF OUR. RHETORIC BUT WE HAVE
ALWAYS ACCEPTED, AS WE MUST, THE ROLE OF THE PROFIT
MOTIVE IN A MIXED ECONOMYx 8/. 
-8-
AT THE RECENT TERRIGAL CONFERENCE, THIS WAS EXPLICITLY
ACKNOWLEDGED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE LABOR PARTY
PLATFORM HOWEVER, THE VERY REAL COMMITMENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY TO A MIXED ECONOMY IS OF MUCH
LONGER STANDING THAN THATv
MOST OF OUR MAJOR DECISIONS FALL WITHIN THE CONTEXT
-OF TWO BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES OBJECTIVES WHICH HAVE
CHARACTERISED THE LABOR PARTY SINCE IT WAS ESTABLISHED AND
WHICH DISTINGUISH THE LABOR PARTY FROM ITS OPPONENTSX
THESE OBJECTIVES ARE: THE EXTENSION OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
AND THE RE-DISTRIBUTION OF INCOMES TO PROMOTE PUBLIC
QUALITY AND PRIVATE EQUALIiY$ OF COURSE SUCH OBJECTIVES
ARE SUBJECT TO THE CONSTRAINTS OF THE GROWTH OF THE ECONOMY
AND THEY CAN ONLY BE ACHIEVED GRADUALLY IN A MIXED ECONOMYK
WE HAVE NO INTENTION TO ACHIEVE EITHER OF THESE AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR WHICH PROVIDES SO IMPORTANT A
DYNAMIC IN OUR ECONOMYx
I FOUND WITH SOME SURPRISE, THAT ONE COMMENT IN
THE TREASURER'S 1974 BUDGET SPEECH WAS SO WIDELY MISINTERPRETED)
HE SAID THEN " THE RELATIVELY SUBDUED CONDITIONS UNDER
PROSPECT IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR PROVIDE THE FIRST REAL
OPPORTUNITY WE HAVEHAD TO TRANSFER RESOURCES TO THE PUBLIC
SECTOR." 1. 19/,. 
-9-
THIS WAS INTERPRETED BY SOME AS A THREAT TO
THE PRIVATE SECTORx IT WAS NOT INTERPRETED IN THE
LIGHT OF A CLEAR OBJECTIVE, WHICH I HAVE MENTIONED ABOVE,
TO EXPAND THE PUBLIC SECTORv
THE GOVERNMENT'S COMMITMENTS IN SUCH AREAS AS
EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND WELFARE CLEARLY IMPLIED THIS
AND SHOULD HAVE COME AS A SURPRISE TO NO-ONEA YET IN.
THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1973/ 74, THE PROPORTION OF GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT EXPENDED IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR
ACTUALLY FELL FROM 32.3 PER CENT TO 31.6 PER CENT,, THIS
OCCURRED DESPITE THE EFFORTS OF THE GOVERNMENT TO LAUNCH
ITS NEW PROGRAMSx WE WERE FRUSTRATED BY-THE QUITE
EXTRAORDINARY SHORTAGES PREVALENT IN THE ECONOMY DURING
THAT PERIQDx To QUOTE ONLY ONE EXAMPLE -OUR OBJECTIVE
TO PROVIDE BETTER HOUSING FOR LESS WELL OFF SECTIONS OF
THE COMMUNITY WAS FRUSTRATED BY SHORTAGES OF MATERIAL AND
LABOUR IN THE HOUSING SECTORX' THE " SUBDUEDCONDITIbN"
TO WHICH THE THEN TREASURER MADE REFERENCE WAS NOT A
THREAT TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR SO MUCH AS A RECOGNITION
THAT THE EXCESS DEMAND WHICH HAD EXISTED UNTIL THEN WOULD
DISAPPEAR 
WE DID NOT PREDICT AT THAT TIME THE QUITE
EXCESSIVE AND RAPID DOWNTURN IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR THAT
HAS OCCURRED THE BUDGET WAS CRITICISED AT THE TIME
AS BEING TOO EXPANSIONARYw IN RETROSPECT WE CAN SEE
THAT IT WAS NOT EXPANSIONARY ENOUGHX THIS DEFECT WAS
CORRECTED BY THE MEASURES ANNOUNCED ON 12 NOVEMBER
WE RECOGNISE THAT THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS THE PRINCIPAL
AVENUE OF EMPLOYMENT IN THIS COUNTRY AND OUR DECISIONS
SINCE THE PRESENT POSITION EMERGED., HAVE CLEARLY INDICATED
THAT THE REVIVAL OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR IS ESSENTIAL FOR
O THE RESTORATION OF FULL EMPLOYMENT,
STo THIS END, WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMBER OF MEASURES
WHICH HAVE FOUR BROAD OBJECTIVESx FIRST, WE HAVE
SUBSTANTIALLY EXPANDED THE AVAILABILITY OF MONEY FOR THE
PRIVATE SECTOR. SECONDLY, WE ARE LIFTING CONSUMER DEMAND
THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN PERSONAL INCOME TAX,
THIRDLY, WE ARE SEEKING TO ATTACK INFLATION BY REDUCING
S THE PRESSURE FOR WAGE INCREASES THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT IN AFTER-TAX TAKE-HOME PAYx FINALLY, WE HAVI
SOUGHT TO ENHANCE PROFITABILITY BY A REDUCTION IN COMPANY
TAX, BY REQUESTING THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL TO GIVE
PARTICULAR CONSIDERATION TO THE ADEQUACY OF RETURNNON CAPITAL
AND BY URGENTLY INVESTIGATING THE IMPLICATIONS OF RAPID
INFLATION. FOR THE TAXATION OF COMPANIES/ THE REPORT OF THE
MATHEWS COMMITTEE IS EXPECTED SOON AND ACTION ON ITS
RECOMMENDATIONS WILL BE PROMPT/ . WE RECOGNISE THE EXTRAORDINARY
IMPACT OF RAPID INFLATION ON CORPORATE TAX RULES, PARTICULARLY
WITH RESPECT TO STOCK VALUATION AND DEPRECIATIONX 1I II I I " I 1l 
-11-
I REFERRED TO THE CONDITIONS OF UNCERTAINTY
WITHIN WHICH BOTH GOVERNMENTS AND BUSINESS HERE AND
SAROUND THE WORLD ARE CURRENTLY FORCED TO OPERATEx
IN AUSTRALIA IT MUST BE SAID THAT THERE IS A SPECIAL
FACTOR OF UNCERTAINTYe THAT IS THE POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY
CREATED BY THE CONTINUING THREAT OF A NEW ELECTIONS WE
ARE CONFRONTED WITH A SITUATION BY-WHICH AUSTRALIA COULD
HAVE NATIONAL ELECTIONS EVERY SIX MONTHSy THIS IS BAD
FOR GOVERNMENT AND IT IS BAD FOR BUSINESSw WHAT
BUSINESSMAN AMONG YOU COULD PLAN ON THE BASIS OF THE NEXT
9 .4
SIX MONTHS ONLY? WHAT BUSINESS COULD OPERATE UNDER THE
THREAT OF-A TOTAL CHANGE IN MANAGEMENT EVERY-SIX MONTHS?
IT IS NOT ONLY THAT THIS THREAT, THIS HARRASSMENT, THIS
WAR OF NERVES, MAKES THE BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT DOUBLY
DIFFICULT; IT IS NOT JUST THE DIFFICULTY THE THREAT ADDS
TO EFFECTIVE PLANNINGx THE ELECTION PROCESS ITSELF
REQUIRES A SUSPENSION OF THE NORMAL BUSINESS, OF THE
NORMAL ADMINSITRATION OF GOVERNMENTw DECISIONS WHICH " 4
SHOULD BE TAKEN ARE NOT TAKEN
IS NOT DONEx. THEWHOLE MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT AT BOTH.
THE POLITICAL AND THE OFFICIAL LEVEL HALTS IN KEY AREAS
AND SLOWS DOWN; IN ALL AREASx
THIS INTERRUPTION CAN BE THE MORE DAMAGING WHEN
AN ELECTION COMES OUT OF THE NORMAL TIME AND IT IS DOUBLY
DAMAGING IN THESE TIMES OF VERY RAPID CHANGE WHEN
GOVERNMENTS MUST ADAPT AND REACT TO THAT CHANGE WITH SPEED
AND VIGOURx 
-12-
THE FACT IS THAT THE MAY ELECTIONS MEANT A VIRTUAL SUSPENSION
OF NORMAL GOVERNMENT FOR NEARLY THREE MONTHS; AND THOSE
MONTHS OF APRiL-MAY-JUNE WERE OBVIOUSLY CRITICAL IN TERMS OF
ECONOMIC POLICY-MAKINGx AS A MATTER OF PROPRIETY I
INSTRUCTED MY MINISTERS TO MAKE NO MAJOR DECISION UNTIL THE
PEOPLE HAD MADE THEIR DECISION, AND MADE IT CLEAR THAT OUR
DECISIONS WOULD NOT COMPROMISE OR I'NHIBIT AN* INCOMING
" GOVERNMENTx o..
EVEN WHEN THE ELECTION RESULTS WERE CLEAR AND
ee
BELIEVE THAT THE TEN DAYS OF UNCERTAINTY WHICH FOLLOWED
POLLING DAY, NOT BECAUSE OF ANY REAL DOUBT ABOUT THE
MEANING OF THE PEOPLE S DECISION, BUT BECAUSE OF THE VAGARIES
AND COMPLEXITIES OF OUR ELECTORAL SYSTEM, WERE THOROUGHLY
DAMAGING TO AUSTRALIA AT HOME AND ABROAD THERE WAS THE
FURTHER INTERRUPTION OF THE JOINT SITTING, IT WAS A
TOTALLY UNNECESSARY INTERRUPTION IN THAT THE OUTCOME OF THE
JOINT SITTING WAS A FOREGONE CONCLUSIONx I DO HOPE THAT
THE DAMAGE DONE, THE UNCERTAINTY CREATED BY THIS THREATENED
DISRUPTION OF OUR NORMAL AND ACCEPTED AND TESTED
CONSTITUTIONAL PROCESSES AND CONVENTIONS IS THOROUGHLY
UNDERSTOOD BY ALL AUSTRALIANSX THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM IS
EVERYWHERE UNDER CHALLENGE AND GREAT STRESSA IT'S NO
COINCIDENCE THAT THE CAPITALIST SYSTEM IS EQUALLY AND
EVERYWHERE UNDER CHALLENGE AND GREAT STRESS), ,13/, 
.: t SYou MIGHT PONDER HOW LONG OUR DEMOCRACY CAN PREVAIL
UNDER THESE REPEATED ASSAULTS, ASSAULTS WHICH, AS
SIR. ROBERT MENZIES HAS SAID, " WILL MAKE POPULAR,
DEMOCRACY UNWORKABLE" x AND YOU MIGHT PONDER HOW LONG
CAPITALISM CAN SURVIVE IF POPULAR DEMOCRACY DOES NOT I
SURVIVEx I VENTURE TO SUGGEST THAT THE VACUES YOU
UPHOLD WILL NOT GO UNCHALLENGED IF THOSE WHO SEEK CHANGE
THROUGH THE PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEM LOSE FAITH IN THE
CAPACITY OF THAT SYSTEM TO PROVIDE PEACEFUL CHANGE
~ 1 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE FEDERAL CONFERENCE OF THE HEALTH AND
RESEARCH EMPLOYEES' ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY, MONDAY 3 MARCH 1975
It is seven years since I had the pleasure
of opening an annual conference of your association.
It was a memorable conference and a memorable year for
my party. It was in 1968 that Labor formulated its
health scheme. In my speech on that occasion I took
one of the first opportunities available to me to
explain publicly the fundamentals of our health program
and the philosophy behind it.
Since then I have often had cause to be
grateful to your association for the support you have
given us support through two elections, continuing
support for one of the fundamentals of Labor's program.
Experience has taught me to be grateful for the fact
that medical care is not solely in the hands of the
medical profession. Health is too serious a matter
to be left to doctors! Your association is one of the
oldest and largest trade unions in Australia. Your
members include a wide range of workers in public, and
private hospitals, in psychiatric hospitals, child
welfare institutions, ambulance services, universities
and laboratories. No one is better qualified by dayto-
day experience to understand Australia's health
problems, why they exist and how they may be resolved.
You know at first hand the shortcomings and inadequacies
of our hospitals, the lack of equipment and facilities,
the problems of staffing and morale. You have seen the
failings of the antiquated and inefficient private
health insurence scheme. At the same time you have
been in the vanguard of many important industrial
reforms. That is why I value so highly the support
you have given the Government support expressed in
successive conference resolutions. ./ 2 
-2
Anyone who heard my speech to you seven years
ago will be forgiven for thinking that the more things
change, the more things ~ remain the same. For the truly
remarkable thing, the sobering thing, is that so much
of what I said to you in 1968 the facts, the figures,
the arguments of 1968 are still part of the current
debate about health care in this country. The Labor
health scheme, the scheme developed and nurtured in
those days, has of course been modified over the years,
but its essential purpose remains the same. We are
determined to bring universal health insurance to every
Australian. We are determined to ensure that every
citizen, regardless of means, enjoys the best medical
and hospital care that an affluent and advanced society
can provide. It is one thing, of course, to grant universal
health insurance coverage. It is another to see that
those benefits give real security against the cost of
hospital and medical care and that the price of this
guarantee can be met by the community. Labor's scheme
means that for the first time the whole community will
be undertaking responsibility for the community's healthjust
as the community is responsible for the education
of chiLldren. It is a sad and astonishing fact that
Australians can still be brought to court, and even put
in gaol, because of an * inability to pay medical and
hospital bills. It is a sad and astonishing fact that
more than a million Australians have no protection
against medical or hospital expenses. And the people
who remain outside the present system are precisely
those most in need of health insurance coverage.
It is certainly not for want of trying that
seven years after it was first proposed, Labor's health
scheme has still to be implemented. Never in the history
of our country has a major social reform faced such
sustained and unscrupulous opposition. our proposals
have been debated interminably. No policy has been more
thoroughly expounded or widely canvassed. Our health
program was adopted at the ALP Federal Conference in
1969. It was first put to the people at the 1969 general
election and was in fact the central issue in that
campaign. It received a clear mandate from the people
in the 1972 elections and again in the 1974 elections.
So the people have three times voted for it, twice
approved it, twice empowered us to put it into action.
The basic legislation has been passed three times by
the House of Representatives. It was one of the bills
that formed the basis of the double dissolution. It
was passed a fourth time at the joint sitting of both
Houses last August. It has had repeated electoral and
legislative endorsement. If ever a party had a mandate
for its legislation, the Labor Party has a mandate for
its health scheme. / 3 
w
-3
There is something about universal health
schemes that arouses a special fury in the hearts of
conservatives. In every western country social democratic
parties have had bitter and protracted struggles to
implement similar proposals. The British national
health service a scheme very different from ours, a
scheme, nevertheless, much maligned and much misunderstood
has been so widely accepted that no Conservative
Government has dared to undo it. You will remember
the efforts of doctors and conservative politicians
in the United States to sabotage the Medicare scheme.
Similar battles have been fought in Canada and New
Zealand. All these schemes have differed in points of
detail, sometimes quite radically, but all of them have
had one basic purpose to make medical treatment
available to all who need it, to ensure that medical
care is not just another marketable commodity but a
right of every citizen.
Of course it is not just doctors who oppose
the health scheme. If we only had the doctors to contend
with our scheme would have been working long ago. In
fact there are thousands of responsible and fair-minded
doctors who support us. The truth is that our health
scheme arouses the deepest conservative instincts in
our political opponents our opponents in the Parliament
and our opponents in the community. The issues involved
are quite fundamental to the basic political struggle.
That struggle is between those who want greater equality
and those who want to preserve the power and privilege
of a minority. It is perfectly obvious that doctors will not
be a whit worse off under the Labor scheme than they
are at present. I am sure the doctors know this in
their hearts. Their incomes will not suffer; indeed
they will rise. Their practices, their day-to-day routines,
will not change. All that will change from the doctors'
point of view is the method of settling accounts. For
many doctors this process will be more prompt, more
simple and more reliable. I regret to say that doctors
have been the victims of their own scare tactics and
irrational prejudice. After next July, when Medibank
is in operation, they will come to see that their fears
were groundless. They will see that they were hoodwinked
by a minority of extremists and propagandists in the
profession and in the Parliament. I am dismayed at the
lengths to which this great profession has gone to
frustrate the wishes of the Australian people. There
has never been a time when doctors were more at odds
with popular opinion, more insensitive to the community's
needs, or more indifferent to self-inflicted wounds on
their professional reputation. 
-4
Misguided as their opposition has been, the
obstruction of the opposition has been even more disgraceful,
their obstinacy on this matter, their utter
contempt for the expressed wishes of the people, have
been staggering. Even when the health bills were passed
at the joint sitting, they proceeded to block our ancillary
legislation to give effect to the Government's measures.
This obliged us to make substantial changes in the method
of financing the scheme.
Even now, with plans for Medibank well advanced,
the Opposition is still threatening and undermining
and misrepresenting our proposals. Mr Snedden last
week told a public meeting in Melbourne that the Liberals
would dismantle Medibank and pull down Labor's plans
for national superannuation and a national compensation
and rehabilitation scheme. These are all programs to
which your association has pledged support. They are
all programs for which the Government has a mandate
from the Australian people. We cannot ignore these
threats. Australians have already seen how a right-wing
Federal Government can destroy a free hospital system.
You will remember that every Australian had free standard
ward hospital treatment for five years in the late
and early ' 50s under an agreement between the States
and the postwar Federal Labor Government. The Menzies
Government broke off that agreement. By June 1953 most
State Governments had re-introduced charges for public
ward patients. Australia's first free hospital scheme
was dismantled. So don't think it cannot happen with
Medibank. It has happened once, and the Liberals would
do it again. Our opponents were never able to decide what
their attitude to the old health scheme should be. They
argued in one breath that no change was needed and in
the next breath that the present scheme can be easily
repaired. When I last spoke to you I drew attention to
some of the central weaknesses of the voluntary scheme.
The Liberals had years to correct the shortcomings of
the private insurance system. They did nothing. Nearly
all the criticisms I made in 1968 can still be made of
the private insurance scheme. It is costly. It is
riddled with duplication and wasteful competition. It
ignores the needs of a million or more Australians who
have no medical or hospital cover. Contributors are
obliged to pay a substantial proportion of the cost of
the health services they receive. The scheme is illequipped
to take account of increases in fee scales.
It imposes unnecessary hardship on pensioners. 
Many of these weaknesses were exposed in
the report of the Nimmo Committee in 1969. Nimmo
proposed many reforms to the old scheme. For example,
they suggested voluntary deductions by employers to
achieve a wider voluntary cover. They proposed a
national Health Insurance Commission and standard ward
hospital care without a means test. The Liberals did
none of these things, but all of them have been incorporated,
in various forms, into the Government's present
proposals. And here we find a particularly striking
example of Opposition obstruction and hypocrisy. Early
in 1968 the Senate set up a committee to look into
hospital and medical charges. Mr Justice Nirrmo' s
committee, to which I have referred, was established
by the Liberal Government partly as a counter to the
Senate committee. I do not disparage either of these
inquiries; they did valuable work. But it was clear
that the previous Government was prepared to ignore
both committees when their findings didn't suit them.
Last December the Senate removed important provisions
from our health legislation relating to the supervision
of health insurance organisations. These provisions
were essential to protect the rights of contributors.
We accepted the Senate's amendments last year
because, had we not done so, other important provisions
of the legislation would have been held up. Last week,
however, the Minister for Social Security, Bill Hayden,
brought in new legislation to cover the provisions
deleted by the Senate. The point is that the Senate's
action last December was directly counter to the
recommendations of both the Nimmo and the Senate's own
committee established in 1968. It was counter to an
undertaking given by Dr Forbes when he was Liberal
Minister for Health. Dr Forbes promised on 4 March 1970
that he would implement the Nimmo recommendations
relating to health fund reserves and the establishment
of a special stabilisation account. In other words
the Senate was ignoring the recommendations of its
own committee and the promises of a Liberal Minister
in obstructing our legislation.
The development of social welfare policy
invariably calls for compromise and flexibility. It
has never been our approach to strike dogmatic attitudes
or to ignore criticism. I believe Bill Hayden's
handling of the Medibank negotiations was a model of
firmness and fair play. To listen to our opponents
you would think we had forced through every detail of
our original scheme and done nothing to accommodate
reasonable suggestions from doctors or interested groups.
/ 6 
6
It is worth looking at some of the modifications
we have made in evolving the final shape of the
Medibank scheme. I don't regard these concessions as
any sort of weakness or backtracting since none of them
undermines the essential structure of our plan. Indeed
I acknowledge that many of the suggestions we have
incorporated will do much to widen and strengthen the
scheme. For example, we have decided to allow people
who want additional private health insurance to insure
with private funds; we have agreed to provide full
benefits for medical services in private hospitals; we
have agreed to increase by 30 per cent to $ 16 a day
the bed subsidy payable to patients in private hospitals;
we have agreed to defer our measures to ensure that
doctors adhere to schedule fees and drop premium
payments designed to encourage doctors to bill the
Health Insurance Commission directly. All this was
done in a process of open public debate, in a spirit
of, co-operation and frankness. Yet the AMA and the
Opposition ignore these reforms and modifications. They
mouth slogans about " freedom of choice" and " nationalised
medicine". For those who still give credence to these
rantings I repeat categorically: We cannot nationalise
medicine and we have not attempted to do so. And every
Australian under Labor's scheme will have complete
freedom to go to any doctor he chooses.
There is one class of patient who will gain
particular benefit from the Medibank scheme. I refer
to pensioners. Currently Pensioner Medical Service
patients are entitled to free treatment only for GP
consultations. In future, pensioner patients will have
access to all medical practitioner treatment specialist
as well as general practitioner, procedural and diagnostic
as well as consultations. Under Medibank, all treatment
will be free to pensioner patients whose doctors agree
to bill Medibank directly that is, if their doctors
accept the medical benefits payable for a particular
service and do not charge pensioners an amount on top
of the benefits. For the rest of the community, as you
know, treatment will also be free if doctors bill Medibank
direct. They will not be bound to do so, and will be
free, if they wish, to bill patients in the traditional
way. In this case the patient will have to meet only
per cent of the schedule fee up a maximum amount
of We are offering the States a much better deal
for hospitals than they have now. We are ready to enter
into agreements with the State Governments to share
equally the net costs of operating State public hospital
systems. This will mean, as it did in the late
and early ' 50s, public ward treatment free of means test
and free of charge. For those choosing private treatment
either in a public or private hospital, there will be an
$ 18 a day subsidy towards hospital bed charges. It is
frankly difficult to imagine why any State Government
would refuse such a generous cost-sharing arrangement
and penalise its citizens so severely. It is obvious / 7 
7
that hospital charges, which have already risen steeply,
will go higher if the present financing system continues.
We are building on existing and well-accepted
public hospital arrangements. The only innovation is
that honorary medical services ( those in public wards
for which no payment is made to the doctor) will be
eliminated. Doctors will be paid on a sessional or
other contract basis. After all doctors in Queensland
are already paid on this basis, and it is accepted by
the AMA in that State. It is moreover, an increasingly
common practice for many visiting specialists at public
hospitals in all States. So far only Tasmania and
Queensland have agreed to co-operate in our scheme. I
hope the other States will come to accept it for the
sake of their people. We owe it to ourselves and our
families to see that every State Government participates
in the new arrangements.
Medibank will mean substantial savings for
every Australian contributing to a health insurance
fund. I give examples of what contributors will save
in New South Wales. For medical insurance alone, $ 96.72
a year; for medical and public ward hospital insurance
$ 157.04 a year; for medical and intermediate ward
insurance $ 132.72; for medical and private ward insurance
$ 123.76. For all that, it would be a mistake to think
of Medibank merely in terms of money savings of extra
cash in the pocket. It represents a great commitment to
community well-being, a great experiment in social
responsibility, a milestone in the history of progressive
Labor legislation. When Medibank is in operation, when
people come to see and feel the practical benefits of
the scheme and the increased sense of social security
it fosters, there will no longer be any talk of pulling
it down. It will stand, like all great reformist measures,
as a permanent landmark in our legislative history. Its
success will owe much to the steadfast support it has
received inside and outside the Labor Party from social
welfare workers, from hospital workers, from enlightened
members of the medical profession, and not least from
the members of your association, whose annual conference
I now have pleasure in opening. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M, P.,
TO A DINNER GIVEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY OF AUTHORS,
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, 4 MARCH 1975
I AM HONOURED THAT YOUR COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT
HAS ARRANGED THIS EVENING FOR ME. THE LAST TIME I SPOKE
AT THE OPERA HOUSE WAS IN THE ELECTION LAST MAY. I WAS
IN THE COMPANY OF PATRICK WHITE, So YOU WILL SEE THAT I
HAVE ALWAYS HAD SOME SUCCESS IN GETTING WRITERS ON SIDES
NOW THAT AUTHO'RS ARE RECEIVING PUBLIC FUNDS, NOW YOU ARE
ALL ON THE GOVERNMENT PAYROLL, I EXPECT AN EVEN BIGGER
TURNOUT AT OUR NEXT OPERA. HOUSE MEETING, WHENEVER THAT
MAY BE. IN THE MEANTIME IT IS A PLEASURE TO MEET SO MANY
OF YOU PERSONALLY, NAMES FAMILIAR FROM INNUMERABLE DUSTJACKETS
AND. TITLE PAGES, FROM COUNTLESS AIRPORT BOOKSTALLS AND
LIBRARY SHELVES, ARE NOW FLESHED OUT IN LIVING FORM.
IT IS GOOD TO BE AMONG YOU.
MY WIFE OF COURSE HAS A MUCH GREATER REPUTATION
AS A WRITER THAN I DO, NEVERTHELESS, I TAKE GREAT PRIDE
IN THE FACT THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ESTABLISH
THE PUBLIC LENDING RIGHT IN FULFILMENT OF ITS UNDERTAKINGS
IN 1972, AUSTRALIA AND. NEW ZEALAND ARE THE ONLY TWO
ENGLISH-SPEAKING COUNTRIES WITH THE PLR. DENMARK, SWEDEN
AND NORWAY ARE THE ONLY OTHER NATIONS TO INTRODUCE IT.
WE DON'T NORMALLY TAKE OUR LITERARY AND ARTISTIC STANDARDS
FROM SCANDINAVIA EXPECT PERHAPS IN FILM MAKING BUT ON
THIS OCCASION WE ARE IN THE VANGUARD OF A VERY IMPORTANT
REFORM, 
-2-
FOR YEARS WE HEARD IT SAID THAT THE PLR WOULD BE
. TOO DIFFICULT TO ADMINISTER, THAT THE LEGAL AND TECHNICAL
PROBLEMS WOULD BE TOO GREA', IT WAS EVEN SUGGESTED THAT
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD NOT GIVE ASSISTANCE TO WRITERS FOR FEAR
OF COMPROMISING THEIR INDEPENDENCE. I THINK WE HAVE
SHOWN THAT THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIFFICULTIES OF PLR WERE NOT
INSUPERABLE AFTER ALL, AND I DOUBT IF ANY OF YOU WILL BE
EASILY SEDUCED BY THE SCALE OF PAYMENTS INVOLVED. WE
DON'T SEE THE PLR AS A PRIVILEGE OR A BENEFIT FOR AUTHORS.
WE SEE IT AS A R'IGHT. WE SEE'IT AS AN OVERDUE RECOGNITION
OF SERVICES YOU HAVE GIVEN THE COMMUNITY; A PAYMENT FOR
YOU WORK, MOST OF YOU WILL. ALREADY HAVE RECEIVED SOME
AMOUNTS UNDER THE SCHEME, LAST WEDNESDAY I AUTHORISED THE
FIRST PAYMENTS RECOMMENDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS
FUND FOR THE 1974-75 FINANCIAL YEAR, AMOUNTING TO $ 440,000
FOR AUTHORS AND PUBLISHERS,
OF COURSE THIS IS NOT A LARGE SUM AS GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURES GO, BUT IT STANDS FOR SOMETHINU IMPORTANT,
IT MEANS THAT AUSTRALIA AS A NATION RECOGNISES THE VALUE OF
CREATIVE WRITING, THE PLACE OF LITERATURE AND THE ARTS' IN
A ROBUST AND CIVILIZED SOCIETY. GOVERNMENTS CANNOT CREATE
GOOD WRITING OR GREAT ART BUT THEY CAN CREATE THE CONDITIONS
IN WHICH ART AND LITERATURE ARE MOST LIKELY TO FLOURISH.
THEY CAN REMOVE UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP,-THE FINANCIAL ANXIETIES
THAT INHIBIT MANY ARTISTS ANI) WRTT[ R EVEN WELL-ESTABLISHED
AND SUCCESSFUL ONES. 
-3-
WRITING IS NOT THE tlt-Pt LUC1tATIVE PROFESSION, AND THE PLR
WILL HARDLY MAKE IT SO; BUT AUTHORS NOW HAVE AN ADDITIONAL
AND A6SURED SOURCE OF INCOME FROM THEIR WORK, AND THAT INCOME
WILL FLOW TO THEIR DA8ENDANTS. I TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO INFORM YOU THAT. THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOW AGREED THAT PLR
PAYMENTS AFTER AN AUTHOR'S DEATH WILL. BE MADE TO THE HUSBAND
OR WIFE OF THE AUTHOR AND TO ALL THE'AUTHOR'S CHILDREN
NOT JUST DEPENDANTS, OUR OBLIGATION TO WRITERS DOES NOT END:-WITH THE
PLR. IT IS JUST OVER TWO YEARS SINCE I ANNOUNCED THE
FOUNDING MEMBERSHIP OF THELITERATURE BOAPD, SINCE THEN WE
HAVE DISBURSED ALMOST $ 2 MILLION FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF
AUSTRALIAN'WRITING AND PUBLISHING. OUR TOTAL BUDGET FOR
THE ARTS THIS FINANCIAL YEAR IS $ 20 MILLION. THIS AGAIN
IS A COMPARATIVELY MODEST SUM IN OVERALL GOVERNMENT
SPENDING, BUT THERE WILL ALWAYS BE CRITICS WHO SEE IT ' 4.
AS WASTEFUL, SOME PEOPLE REGARD ANY SPENDING ON THE.
ARTS AS WASTEFUL. I DON'T, I BELIEVE THE ARTS ARE A
PROPER, INDEED A PRIMARY, AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
IT IS NOT SO MUCH THAT PRESENT EXPENDITURES ARE EXTRAVAGANT.
BUT THAT PREVIOUS EXPENDITURES WERE INADEQUATE AND UNPLANNED.
THE ARTS ARE A FIELD IN WHICH QUITE MODEST INVESTMENTS CAN
BRING HIGH RETURNS. IT COSTS THE COMMUNITY VERY LITTLE TO GIVE
A PROMISING AUTHOR AN INCOME FOR SIX MONTHS OR A YEAR,
THE BENEFITS FROM SUCH EXPENDITURE THE RETURNS TO SOCIETY,
AND ONE HOPES TO POSTERITY MAY WELL BE INESTIMABLE, 
THE EMPHASIS IN OUR SUPPORT FOR THE ARTS HAS BEEN
ON ENCOURAGING WORTHWHILE PROJECTS, ON DEVELOPING TALENTS,
ON M~ VING HELP WHERE HELP IS NEEDED OILING THE MACHINE.
TAKE PUBLISHING. IT IS PROBABLY TRUE THAT MOST BOOKS WORTH
PUBLISHING WILL BE PUBLISHED ANYWAY, BlUT WHAT THE LITERATURE
BOARD CAN DO IS MAKE PUBLICATION A LITTLE MORC PROMPT
AND EASY. A SUBSIDY CAN BRING DOWN THE PRICE OF A BOOK AND
MAKE IT AVAILABLE TO A WIDER AUDIENCE. OUR PRESENT
SUBSIDY SCHEME. GOES FURTHER . THAN THE PRACTICE OF THE OLD
COMMONWEALTH LITERARY FUND OF GUARANTEEING'A PUBLISHER
AGAINST LOSS. I THINK THE LITERATURE BOARD-HAS HAD SOME.
NOTABLE SUCCESSES IN HELPI NG THE PUBLICATION OF MORE AUSTRALIAN
WRITING. IN 1972-73 NO MORE THAN 18 NOVELS WERE PUBLISHED
BY THE LOCAL INDUSTRY. SUBSIDIES TO DATE HAVE HELPED THE
PUBL ICATION OF 21 NOVELS AND 23 VOLUMES OF POETRY AND
OTHERS, OF COURSE, HAVE BEEN PUBLISHED WITHOUT SUBSIDIES#
SO THERE HAS BEEN SOME PORGRESS'HERE. QUANTITY DOES NOT
ALWAYS MEAN QUALITY; BUT THERE ARE DEGREES OF QUALITY, AND
WORK OF THE-HIGHEST MERIT MAY SOMETIMES RESULT FROM
ENCOURAGEMENT GIVEN TO EFFORT OF A LESSER OR MOST MODEST KIND.'
11 a, 
WHAT WE ARE TRYING TO DO IS ENCOURAGE A WHOLE NEW
CLIMATE IN THE ARTS, A NEW PERCEPTION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF
THE ARTS IN THE LIVES OF AUSTRALIANS, AS WELL AS GREATER
ACTIVITY AND GREATER VITALITY. WE WANT THE ARTS TO
PERMEATE SOCIETY AT ALL LEVELS, TO BE AVAILABLE TO EVERYONE
WHO WANTS THEM AND) DARE ONE SAY IT TO SOME . PEOPLE WHO
DON IT: FUNDAMENTALLY, OUR ASSISTANC'E TO THE ARTS IS NOT
INTENDED TO BENEFIT ARTISTS THEMSELVES, THOUGH INEVITABLY
IT DOES, AND ONE WOULD NOT WISH IT OTHERWISE: IT IS
INTENDED AS A SOCIAL MEASURE, PART OF A COMMITMENT TO THE
QUALITY OF. PEOPLE IS LIVES. NOT THE LEAST OF-THE SOCIAL
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEPRIVATIONS AT THE HEART OF OUR
CONTEMPORARY URBAN MALAISE IS THE INADEQUACY OF ARTISTIC AND
CULTURAL STIMULATION; A LACK OF ACCESS TO THE ENRICHMENTAND
STIMULATION THAT THE ARTS ALONE CAN BRING. W~ E DON'T WANT
TO BE POMPOUS OR PATRONISING ABOUT SUCH THINGS. IT IS NOT
FOR GOVERNMENTS TO TELL PEOPLE WHAT THEY SHOULD LIKE. IT
IS, HOWEVER, A RESPONSIBILITY OF GOVERNMENTS TO MAKE THE
BENEFITS AND REWARD S OF OUR CIVILIZATION AND INDEED OTHER
CIVILIZATIONS AS WIDELY AVAILABLE AS POSSIBLE. CERTAINLY
IREGARD THAT AS A DUTY OF SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENTS
SUCH AS MINE.-OPPORTUNITIES FOR CULTURAL AND ARTISTIC
ENJOYMENT SHOULD BE-PROVIDED , READILY, AND AS EQUALLY, AS
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION OR HEALTH. IT MAY EVEN BE
ARGUED THAT THE ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS IS AN ESSENTIAL PART
OF EDUCATION AND HEALTH. 9 e/ 6 
-6-
I HOPE THE ASSISTANCE WE ARE GIVING TO AUTHORS
WILL ENCOURAGE A STRONGER INDIGENOUS LITERARY COMMUNITY.
IN-PARTICULAR, I HOPE IT WIL. L ENCOURAGE AUSTRALIAN
WRITERS ABROAD TO RETURN TO AUSTRALIA. I DON'T BLAME
AUTHORS FOR WANTING TO WORK ABROAD; FAR BE IT FROM ME
TO DISPARAGE THE IMPORTANCE OF OVERSEAS TRAVEL. FOR THOSE
LIKE COLIN SIMPSON, WHO WRITE TRAVEL BOOKS, I SUPPOSE
SME TRAVEL. IS ESSENTIAL. NOW THAT WE HAVE THE PLR I MAY
BE ENCOURAGED. TO KEEP A DIARY OF MY OWN, As OSCAR WILDE
SAID I LIKE SOMETHING SENSATIONAL TO READ ON THE TRAIN.
OUR MISFORTUNE WAS THAT TOO MANY WRITERS WHO TRAVELLED
ABROAD PREFERRED NOT TO LIVE IN AUSTRALIA. THERE WAS A
CLASS OF EXPATRIATE AUSTRALIAN WHOSE CRITICAL FACULTIES,
WHOSE POWERS OF SOCIAL OBSERVATION, WERE SORELY NEEDED AT
HOME. WE WERE THE POORER FOR LOSING THEM. I KNOW THAT IN
MANY WAYS AUSTRLAIA CANNOT PROVIDE ALL THE STIMULATION A
WRITER NEEDS; ALL THE EXPERIENCE OR ALL THE PECUNIARY
REWARDS. NEVERTHELESS, I SEE OUR ASSISTANCE TO WRITERS,
IN PARTICULAR THE PLR, AS SYMBOLS OF A DEVELOPING
CULTURAL MATURITY. I HOPE THEY WILL BE A: PRACTICALN CINCENTIVE
To AUSTRALIAN AUTHORS TO LIVE AND WORK-IN THEIR OWN COUNTRY. 17 
-7-
WE HAVE IN AUSTRALIA A RICH AND REMARKABLY DIVERSE
' LITERARY HERITAGE. THE LABOR PARTY OWES MUCH TO IT.
CONSIDERING OUR COMPARATIVELY SMALL POPULATION, OUR
CONTRIBUTION TO WESTERN LITERATURE HAS BEEN EXTRAORDINARY.
THE STIMULUS WE ARE GIVING TO THE OTHER ARTS, TO THE THEATRE.-
AND TO THE FILM AND TELEVISION INDUSTRIES, WILLCREATE
WIDER OPPORTUNITIES FOR AUSTRALIAN WRITERS. THESE
OPPORTUNITIES MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO COMPROMISE ARTISTIC
STANDARDS. SADLYo OUR REPUTATION ABROAD IS NOT ONE OF
HIGH CULTURAL ATTAINMENT11. IDEPLORE THE INFLUENCES IN THE
MEDIA, IN ENTERTAINMENT THAT PERPETUATE A DEBASED AND
DISTORTED VIEW OF OUR SOCIETY. ONE OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE
COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS UNDER THIS GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN THE
PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE IN ALL FIELDS OF ART; IT IS FOR
WRITER S AND PUBLISHERS TO PRESERVE THESE STANDARDS IN OUR
WRITING. BE WARY OF THE PRETENTIOUS; DON'IT BE SATISFIED
WITH THE SLIPSHOD OR THE SECOND-RATE, WITH SECOND-HAND OR
DERIVATIVE IDEAS. IF AUSTRALIAN WRI'TING IS TO HAVE ADISTINCTIVE
PLACE IN WORLD LITERATURE IT WILL'BE BASED
ON AN AUTHENTIC AND ORIGINAL STYLE. OUR BEST WRITING HAS
ALWAYS REFLECTED OR EMBODIED SOME PECULIAR. TRUTH ABOUT
OURSELVES, WHETHER EXPOSING SOCIAL INJUSTICE OR REVEALING
QUALITIES IN THE AUSTRALIAN CHARACTER. THIS HAS NOTHING
TO DO WITH CRUDE NATIONALISM. GREAT-WRITING IN EVERY SOCIETY,
ESPECIALLY GREAT FICTION, WHILE DEALING IN UNIVERSAL HUMAN
VALUESo HAS CHOSEN DISTINCTIVE NATIONAL AND REGIONAL
IDIOMS. IT IS THROUGH SUCH NATIONAL IDIOMS THAT THE BEST
WRITING HAS ACHIEVED ITS TIMELESS QUALITY AND BROUGHT US
CLOSER TO A DEEPER KNOWLEDGE OF OURSELVES AND OF HUMANITY. 
I HOPE I WILL BE FORGIVEN THIS SOMEWHAT PORTENTOUS
NOTE. THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ARTS IS BY NO MEANS THE
LEAST TROUBLESOME OF MY RESPONSIBILITIES; IT IS, HOWEVER,
AMONG THE MOST SATISFYING. I LIKE TO THINK THAT WE ARE
CREATING PRECEDENTS AND ESTABLISHING ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURES AND INSTITUTIONS THAT WILL-PERMANENTLY ENHANCE
THE QUALITY OF ARTISTIC LIFE IN THIS COUNTRY. DO NOT
IMAGINE THAT THE THINGS WE ARE DOING OUR BOARDS AND
COUNCILS, OUR SPECIAL GRANTS AND SUBSIDIES ARE INVULNERABLE
TO ATTACK. THEY ARE NOT. THEY MUST BE GUARDED'AND PRESERVED,
THE CURRENT LEGAL CHALLENGE BY CERTAIN STATES TO THE
VALIDITY OF THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME AND
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN HAS IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF MANY KINDS OF ESTABLISHED GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS
INVOLVING COMMONWEALTH GRANTS TO INDIVIDUALS AND GROUPS.
IF THIS CHALLENGE SUCCEEDS THE PLR WOULD BE AT RISK, YOUR
SOCIETY, I NOTICE, IN AN EDITORIAL IN " THE AUSTRALIAN .4
AUTHOR", HAS EXPRESSED CONCERN ABOUT THE SECURITY OF THE
PLR AND URGED THAT IT SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED BY AN ACT OF
PARLIAMENT. ACTS OF PARLIAMENT, OF COURSE, CAN ALWAYS BE
REPEALED; THOUGH I ACKNOWLEDGE THE FORCE OF YOUR ARGUMENT.
I ASSURE YOU IT WILL HAVE THE GOVERNMENT'S FULL CONSIDERATION. S 
-9-
Two YEARS AGO, WHEN I ANNOUNCED OUR INTENTION TO
ESTABLISH THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AS AN
INDEPENDENT AGENCY, I SAID THIS ABOUT OUR GENERAL POLICY
FOR THE ARTS: " THE POLICIES WHICH my GovERNMENT'WILL PURSUE
WILL HAVE A TWO-FOLD OBJECTIVE THE PURSUIT OF
EXCELLENCE AND THE SPREAD OF INTEREST AND
PARTICIPATION, WE WILL SUPPORT THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS AND PROGRAMS WHICH PRODUCE, SUSTAIN
AND DISPLAY THE TOP LEVEL OF PROFESSIONAL
ACHIEVEMEN4T IN THE'ARTS THE . MAJOR THEATRE
COMPANIES AND ORCHESTRAS, THE NATIONAL GALLERY
AND COLLECTION, AND SMALLER GROUPS AND PARTICULAR
PROJECTS OF HIGH QUALITY. BUT OUR SUPPORT FOR
ESTABLISHED ORGANISATIONS AND ART FORMS WILL
BE BALANCED BY A STRONG PROGRAM OF ENCOURAGEME4T
FOR EXPERIMENT AND DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR NUMEROUS
SMALLER GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS, WHOSE ACTIVITIES
BRING ENJOYMENT TO MANY PEOPLE...
"' VITALITY IN THE ARTS IS FREQUENTLY ACCOMPANIED
BT INNOVATION, BY CONTROVERSY AND BY CHALLENGE
TO ESTABLISHED CONVENTIONS OF TASTE, BELIEFS AND
BEHAVIOUR. ARTISTS NEED PROTECTION FROM
UNNECESSARY RESTRAINTS, AND GOVERNMENTS
BE ABLF TO RESIST PRESSURE FROM THOSE WHO ARE
DISTURBED BY CONTROVERSY AND CHALLENGE." .1/ 10 
THESE REMAIN OUR OBJECTIVES, THE PLR AND OUR OTHER
PROGRAMS FOR AUTHORS ARE CONSISTENT WITH THESE AIMS. I
COMMEND THE WORK OF YOUR SOCIETY IN HELPING US DEVELOP AND
IMPLEMENT OUR PROGRAMS, WE DON'T LOOK TO WRITERS JUST
FOR ENTERTAINMENT OR ESCAPE, THOUGH GOOD ENTERTAINMENT IS
A HIGH AND NECESSARY CRAFT. WE LOOK-TO YOU ALSO FOR
THAT SPIRIT OF INNOVATION, CONTROVERSY, OF CHALLENGE,
THAT IS THE BASIS OF ALL CHANGE AND ALL TRUE PROGRESS.
AUSTRALIA WILL ALWAYS NEED MORE WRITERS. WE WILL ALWAYS
NEED BCTTER WRITERS, AND BETTER WRITERS WHO ARE BETTER OFF.
I KNOW THE GOVERNMENT CAN COUNT ON YOUR SUPPORT, JUST AS
YOU THE WRITERS AND AUTHORS OF AUSTRALIA CAN COUNT
ON OURS, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, 2
THE HON, E. C. WHITLA1l, 0l. C,, M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF AUSTRALIA
FESTI\' AL OF CREATIVE ARTS AND SCIENCES,
LAKESIDE INTERNATIONAL HOTEL, CANBERRA,
7 MARCH 1975 4
OCCASIONS SUCH AS THIS ARE AMONG THE REWARDS, IF NOT THE
LUXURIES, OF POLITICAL LIFE, WHERE ELSE BUT IN POLITICS
W'OULD ONE FIND MORE CONGENIAL SURROUNDINGS, MORE REFINED
COMPANY, A GATHERING OF SUCH DIVERSE TALENTS AND RARE
MI1NDS, AN ATMOSPHERE OF SUCH LIVELY DEDICATION TO ALL THAT
IS BEST AND MOST CULTIVATED IN OUR SOCIETY? THIS IS A
UNIQUE FESTIVAL BRINGING TOGETHER THE ARTS AND THE
SCIENCES AND BRINGING THEM BOTH TO A WIDE AUDIENCE. '~ E
HAVE HAD ARTS FESTIVALS BEFORE, WE HAV/ E HAD SCIENTIFIC
EXHIBITIONS BEFORE; BUT I CANNOT REMEMBJER AN OCCASION
WHEN THE TWO WERE COMBINED SO SUCCESSFULLY, SO LOGICALLY
AS THEY HAVE BEEN IN THE PLANNING FOR AUSTRALIA 75. IT
IS A TRIBUTE TO THE ORGANISERS; AN HISTORIC EVENT IN TH~ E
DEVELOPMENT OF OUR NATIONAL CAPITAL; A DEMONSTPATION OF
THE HIGHEST ATTAINMENTS OF A NATION'IS CULTURE AND THE
HIGHEST VALUES OF OUR CIVILIZATION, i @/ 2 
-2-
NOT LONG AGO A FRIEND SENT flE A COPY OF THE LATE
DR. JOHN BRONOWSKI ' S BOOK THE ASCENT OF MIAN. SOME OF
YOU WILL REMEMBER THE RECENT TELEVISION SERIES EASED UPON
IT; I'M NOT SURE IF THE BOOK WAS BASED ON THE FILM OR THE
FILM ON THE BOOK FILMS AND BOOKS ARE PLEASURES ALL TO
RARE FOR ME. NEVERTHELESS, I CAME ACROSS THJS
STATEMENT: " MAN IS UNIQUE, NOT IECAUSE HE DOES SCIENCE,
AND HE IS UNIQUE NOT BECAUSE HE DOES ART, BUT BECAUSE
SCIENCE AND ART ARE EQUALLY THE EXPRESSIONS OF HIS
MARVELLOUS PLASTICITY OF MIND." i THAT SEEMED A FITTING
TEXT FOR THIS FESTIVAL. PERHAPS I MIGHT EXTEND IT BY
SAYING THAT MAN IS UNIQUE IN PERCEIVING THE CONNECTION
BETWEEN ART AND SCIENCE, IN RECOGNISING THEIR INDEPENDENCE,
THEIR EQUAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE GOOD LIFE.
THAT IS WHAT YOUR FESTIVAL IS HELPING~ TO DO.
THE BEST ART AND THE PURIEST SCIENCE REFLECT THE SAME
ATTITUDES OF MIND CREATIVITY, IMAGINATION, A DISINTERESTEDLOVE
OF BEAUTY AND TRUTH, BERTRAND PUSSELL OBSERVED
THAT PURE MATHEMATICS, PROPERLY VIEWED, POSSESSED THE
SAME AUSTERE BEAUTY OF THE BEST MUSIC, WITHOUT ITS
GORGEOUS TRAPPINGS. UNDOUBTEDLY THERE HAVE BEEN RARE
INDIVIDUALS V! ITH BOTH SCIENTIFIC AND ARTISTIC GIFTS.
ONE THINKS OF LEONARDO, OF DARWIN, OF EINSTEIN AND AGAIN
OF RUSSELL. C. P. SNOW WAS THE FIRST POPULAR WRITER IN OUR
OWN" GENERATION TO SEEK A BRIDGE BETWEEN THE HUMANE AND
SCIENTIFIC DISCIPLINES. 
CERTAINLY IT IS TIME WE ABANDONED THE IDEA THAT SCIENCE
AND THE ARTS ARE HOSTILE,. OR EVEN NECESSARILY DISTINCT, A
GREAT DEAL OF MODERN ART HAS A TECHNOLOGICAL EASE. THE
CINEMA IS A PRODUCT OF CHEMISTRY AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING;
TELEVISION SPRINGS FROM ADVANCED ELECTRONICS; THE THEATRICAL
ARTS DEPEND MIORE AND MORE ON THEIR SOPHISTICATED TECHNOLOGY
OF STAGECRAFT AND PRODUCTION; LITERATURE RELIES ON MO11DERN
TECHNIQUES OF PRINTING.
W-HAT I HOPE THIS FESTIVAL WILL DO IS CONVINCE US THA
A SOCIETY WITHOUT A RESPECT FOR ART IS AS BARREN AND
DANGEROUS AS A SOCIETY WITHOUT A RESPECT FOR SCIENCE. THE
PRE-SCIENTIFIC AGE IN EUROPE WAS NO LESS BARBAROUS FOR ITS
ARTISTIC GLORIES. a NTO UNTIL THE DAWNING OF THE AFE OF SCIENCE,
WITH THE GROWTH OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND SCIENTIFIC
DISCIPLINE, WAS MAN READY TO TEMPER HIS DESTRUCTIVE URGES,
HIS MEDIEVAL FANATICISM, WITH REASON AND TOLERANCE. AND
THE CONVERSE IS EQUALLY TRUE, HAV'E SEEN EXAMPLES
OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETIES ',! ITH CRIPPLIW3RESTRAINTS
ON THE ARTIST IS FREEDOM. I HAVE BEEN CRITICISED IN' RECENT
MONTHS FOR MY FONDNESS FOR ANCIENT G-REECE, THE Uf-. IQUE GLORY
OF GREEK CIVILIZATION W. AS ITS EQUP! L RESPECT FOR SCIENCE AND
THE ARTS; THE TWO WERE HELD IN A PERPETUAL BALANCE, THE GREEK
CONTRIBUTION TO PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS WAS AS ENDURING AS
TIS CONTRIBUTION TO POETRY AND DRAMA, AND THAT WAS 140 MERE
CO-INCIDENCE: THERE WAS UNDOUBTEDLY A QUALITY IN THE
INTELLECTUAL SPIRIT AND TEMPER OF ' THENS THAT INSPIRED BOTH ART
AND SCIENCE WITH A COMMON PURPOSE,
04JE OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF OUR TIME IS THE
DEPENDENCE OF ART AND SCIENTIFIC ENDEAVOUR ON GOVERNMENT
SUPPORT ON PUBLIC FUNDS. 
-LI~
I SEE NOTHING WRONG WITH THAT; IT IS PROBABLY INEVITABLE, EVEN
DESIRABLE, PROVIDED ARTISTS AND SCIENTISTS MAINTAIN THEIR
INDEPENDENCE OF GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY, OUR CURRENT BUDGET
FOR THE ARTS is $ 20 MILLION A YEAR, OUR OUTLAYS FOR SCIENCE
COVER AN ENORMOUS RANGE OF DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.
EXPENDITURE ON THE C. S. I. R. OI AND THE ATOMIC ENERGY
COMMISSION ALONE AMOUNTS TO SOME $ 110 MILLION IN A FULL YEAR.
IN ADDITION, MUCH OF OUR EXPENDITURE-ON TERTIARY EDUCATION IS
DIRECTED TO ISCIENTIFIC AND ARTISTIC OR CULTURAL PROJECTS.
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN GOVERNMENTS WERE MORE
INVOLVED IN SCIENCE AND THE ARTS. ( THE GREEKS, INCIDENTALLY,
WERE EXPERTS IN ALL THREE.) THERE HAc, NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN
SCIENCE AND THE ARTS ACTIVITIES SO PERVASIVE, SO POPULAR, SO
FUNDAMENTAL TO OUR WAY OF LIFE WERE LESS ABLE TO SUPPORT
THEMSELVES. THE FACT IS THAT IN THEIR PUREST FORM THEY HAVE NOTHING
TO DO WITH PROFIT-MAKING, THOUGH BOTH CAN BE APPLIED FOR
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES. AND I MUSTSAY I PREFER THAT OUJR
INVESTMENT IN THESE FIELDS SHOULD BE A COMMUNITY INVESTMENT,
THAT THESE BASIC AREAS OF RESEARCH AND CREATIVITY SHOULD BE
PROTECTED FROM ANY SUSPICION OF PRIVATE GAIN OR OFFICIAL
PATRONAGE. ONLY GOVERNMENTS CAN PROVIDE THE FUNDS FOR AN OPERA
HOUSE: ONLY GOVERNMENTS CAN PROVIDE THE FUNDS FOR A NUCLEAR
REACTOR, A THEATRE, A TELESCOPE OR AN ORCHESTRA. MODERN
ENLIGHTENED GOVERNMENTS ACCEPT THESE THINGS AS BEING JUST AS
MUCH PART OF THEIR RESPONSIBILITY AS EDUCATION OR HEALTH. m 
IN OUR POLICIES FOR THE ARTS IN PARTICULAR
WE HAVE SOUGHT TO ENSURE THAT PUBLIC FUNDS ARE DISBURSED
THROUGH INDEPENDENT AGENCIES. WE HAVE LEGISLATION
CURRENTLY BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH THE
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS AS AN INDEPENDENT
STATUTORY AUTHORITY. IT IS ALREADY ADMINISTERING ITS
POLICIES THROUGH AUTONOMOUS BOARDS WITH COMPLETE
INDEPENDENCE OF* GOVERNMENT OR MINISTERIAL INFLUENCE.
ONLY TWO NIGHTS AGO I INTRODUCED LEGISLATION TO
ESTABLISH IN CANBERRA THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY.
IT WILL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A NATIONAL COLLECTION OF
WORKS OF ART AND PROVIDE AN ART FOCUS FOR THE WHOLE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY. THE GALLERY WILL BE A STATUTORY
AUTHORITY. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY AND THE. A. B. C. OPERATE
WITH SIMILAR INDEPENDENCE. THESE ARE SOUND PRINCIPLES
AND No GOVERNMENT WOULD WANT TO CHANGE THEM.
THE ARTS BY THEIR NATURE ARE A PUBLIC t ACTIVITY,.
THEY ARE MEANT TO BE SEEN AND HEARD. SCIENCE IS
MORE RETIRING, MORE CLOISTERED MORE ESOTERIC. ONE.
OF THE GREAT THINGS ABOUT YOUR FESTIVAL IS THAT
THOUSANDS OF AUSTRALIANS WILL COME TO '-EE MORE OF
AUSTRALIA'S CONTRIBUTION TO SCIENTIFIC ACHIEVEMENT AND
INQUIRY. WE HAVE A GREAT RECORD, BUT FAR TOO LITTLE
IS KNOWN. CAN RECALL THREE OCCASIONS AS PRIME MINISTER
WHEN I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR OF OPENING, OR BEING PRESENT
AT THE OPENING, OF NEW SCIENTIFIC FACILITIES AND ALL
OF THEM'WERE SYMBOLIC OF AUSTRALIA'S RENOWNED AND
IMPORTANT WORK IN THEIR FIELDS. 
-6-
THERE WAS A NUCLEAR FACILITY AT THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY; OUR WORK IN HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS IS OF GREAT
IMPORTANCE. THERE WAS THE NEW OPTICAL TELESCOPE AT
SIDING SPRINGS, AND THE DEEP SPACE TRACKING STATION AT
TIDBINBILLA. WE ARE AMONG THE LEADING NATIONS IN ASTRONOMY,
PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELD OF RADIO ASTRONOMY, AND WE ARE AN
IMPORTANT LINK IN WORLD-WIDE SPACE TRACKING NETWORKS$
THESE, PERHAPS, ARE THE MORE SPECTACULAR AND POPULAR ASPECTS
OF SCIENCE' I DO NOT FORGET THE QUIET, DEDICATED, VALUABLECONTRIBUTIONS
OF AUSTRALIAN SCIENTISTS To ANTARCTIC RESEARCH,
TO GEOLOGY, TO BIOLOGY, TO MEDICINE, TO PHYSICS. THIS
FESTIVAL WILL BRING MANY ASPECTS OF OUR SCIENTIFIC EFFORT TO
A WIDE AND INTERESTED AUDIENCE.
IT WOULD BE A PITY IS I MADE THIS OCCASION SEEM TOO0
ACADEMIC OR SOLEMN. IT IS, AFTER ALL, A EESI. ALESSENTIALLY
A TIME FOR ENJOYMENT, THERE ARE MANY
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SHEER FUN AND RECREATION, I AM GLAD IT IS
TO BE A BIENNIAL EVENT, AND I AM PARTICULARLY GLAD THAT THE
FIRST IS BEING HELD IN THE NATIONAL CAPITAL, SYMBOLISING THE
CREATIVITY AND ACHIEVEMENT OF THE WHOLE NATION. I AM NOT AN
ARTIST OR A SCIENTIST, BUT AT LEAST I CAN ENJOY AUSTRALIA
AS A CENTRALIST. I CONGRATULATE THE FESTIVAL BOARD FOR THEIR
DEDICATED PLANNING AND PREPARATION,-AUSTRALIA 75 WILL
ENHANCE OUR KNOWLEDGE OF SCIENCE AND OUR ENJOYMENT OF THE ARTS$
JUST AS IMPORTANT, IT WILL BRING THESE ETERMAL DISCIPLINES
TOGETHER, REVEALING THEIR COMMON PURPOSE IN THE GREAT WEB OF
BEAUTY, KNOWLEDGE AND CONTEMPLATION,
IHAVE THE GREATEST PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN AUSTRALIA
THE FESTIVAL OF CREATIVE ARTS AND SCIENCES, IN CANBERRA. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. r4HITLAM, M. P.
COMMITTEE FOR. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF AUSTRALIA
MENZIES HOTEL, SYDNEY
FRIDAY, 7 MARCH, 1975
This is the second successive Friday Luncheon
I've spoken to representatives of the Sydney business
community. If there are any here who were also at the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce Luncheon I hope they will bear
with any repetitiousness on my pa . rt because I do think
that my theme itself bears some repetition.
I emphasised there my Government's long-term
commitment to the prosperity of tJ-le private sector.
I was at some pains to refute the-assertion that there is
anything phoney about this commitment that it represents
some sort of panic response to present difficulties. I
concede that there have been failures of communication in
the past and I concede that some prejudices and
pre-conceptions on both sides have raised needless
difficulties. I do detect, however, in the business
community generally a new willingness to co-operate, born
of a mutual recognition that we share so many of the
difficulties for so many of the same reasons. I think
on both sides there is a willingness to end futile
recriminations which of course, is not to say that we
should not have plenty of constructive criticism. If
I am right in this assessment that there is a healthier
spirit emerging then I assure business that the Government
is ready to go more than half way to foster it.
Last Friday I drew attention to the way in which
economic circumstances here and throughout the world
were now subject to rapid change never experienced in
our life-times. The business cycle which used to take
five to seven years for its completion now appears to
take about two years. This imposes unprecedented
pressures on both Government and business and requires
very great flexibility in policy planning for business
and Government alike. In this situation one has to be
extremely careful in making predictions based on the
latest set of economic indicators. We have seen too
many false dawns. Nonetheless, there are grounds for
some cautious optimism. When I announced the new
economic measures of 12 November 1974 and in subsequent
statements to the nation, I emphasised the figures,
particularly on unemployment and inflation, would not
be good for many months to come. This remains true. 
-2-
The situation at present, however, is that some of the
more serious aspects of decline in activity are now
behind us. Liquidity is freely available and the
demand for funds, particularly for housing, is high.
Imports are declining and the balance of payments
situation particularly on current account is
strengthening. We are seeking the first real signs that
unemployment and inflation may have peaked. With the
large personal tax cuts, including the housing interest
deductability scheme now being reflected in pay packets,
disposable incomes are rising strongly. By past
standards the Government has given a massive expansionary
boost to the economy in the measures taken since the
budget. These are, of course, not normal times and we
cannot be absolutely assured of normal reactions. The
response of the private sector is the key ingredient in
economic revival in 1975. You can be assured that the
Government will do all in its power. to stimulate that
revival, consistent with our overall goals of social
advance and economic management.
At the recent conference of the Australian Labor
Party we inserted in the platform a specific recognition
of the role of the private sector and a specific
commitment to the development of a healthy mixed economy.
I think it should be recognised, however, that the present
Australian Government itself has from its inception
tried to establish machinery and set in train measures
to give practical expression to the formal commitment
now contained in the Party's platform. In December 1972
we established the Department of Manufacturing Industry.
The first Minister was the present Treasurer and he set
about establishing a network of industrial panels to
provide channels for closer co-operation and consultation.
Against much opposition we have sought to develop the
role of the Australian Industry Development Corporation.
In our first budget we provided funds to establish the
National Management School within the University of New
South Wales. We have set up the Small Business Bureau
to provide advice and assistance for this very important
but long neglected sector. We have sought to enhance
profitability by reduction in company tax, by requesting
the Prices Justification Tribunal to give particular
consideration to the adequacy of return on capital and by
urgently investigating the implications of rapid inflation
for the taxation paid by companies. The report of the
Mathews Committee is expected soon and actions on its
recommendations will be prompt. We recognise the
extraordinary impact of rapid inflation on corporate tax
rules, particularly with respect to stock valuation and
appreciation. / 3. 
-3-
Perhaps most important of all in its long term
implications will be the report of the Committee of
Inquiry under the Chairmanship of Mr Gordon Jackson,
General Manager of C. S. R. The Jackson Committee's
terms of reference are to advise on the future role of
manufacturing industry, the role of foreign companies
in the Australian economy, the long term balance between
exports and imports, better communication between
Government, industry, the States and employees'
organisations. I am quite determined that the report
of the Jackson Committee will not suffer the fate of
the Vernon Committee. We will not stall it or pigeon-hole
it and we will not set out deliberately to rubbish it or
bucket it. One of the sorriest aspects of the Vernon Report
was that the treatment meted out to it acted as a
discouragement to highly qualified, busy and public spirited
persons in serving the nation in similar roles. One of
the most gratifying experiences I have had as Prime Minister
has been the readiness of distinguished Australians, in
business, the professions and the Universities to serve on
the many commissions and committees of inquiry which we
have established. I believe that a big factor contributing
to this readiness to serve has been the positive acceptance
by the Government of their work. Men and women called upon
to serve Australia in this way know that they are not
wasting their time.
our major piece of current legislation concerning
the private sector is, of course, the Corporations and
Securities Industry Bill. I am sure that members of
C. E. D. A. are too sophisticated to give the Pavlovian
response we ' ye had from some quarters that this is an
attack on freedom of private enterprise. The fact is
that without the establishment of the Corporations and
Exchange Commission as the National Regulatory Authority
to supervise the securities industry in Australia, the
future prosperity of Australia cannot be assured because
the economic development of any nation is directly
determined by its efficiency in raising new capital.
During the mining boom, vast sums of money were raised
which was wasted and never found its way into mining.
The efficient mobilization and allocation of
capital through the medium of the stock exchanges can only be
optimised if the exchanges provide and, just as significantly
are seen to provide, a fair and orderly market. The market
must be one in which both the financially sophisticated
investor and also the unsophisticated investor with the
aid of his investment adviser can invest his capital.
However large or small an amount it may be, with the
knowledge that the risk he assumes can be evaluated on
accurate information disclosed to him and that his risk will
be subject only to the usual commercial hazards. 
-4-
The self-regulating activities of the Stock
exchanges during the mining boom period were abysmally
lax. Even formal rules, which were and are still
minimal, were as the RAE Report recounts seldom
enforced and were viewed with contempt by some members
who continued with their practices in blatant disregard
of the stock exchange regulations and of their fiduciary
duties, on the assumption that their abuses would go
undetected or unpunished; an assumption by no means
unreasonable in the absence of adequate surveillance
by some independent authority.
The genuine difficulties which have been
encountered by self-regulatory bodies and the State
authorities in dealing with the securities industry have
been partly due to the failure of some of the States to
recognise the national character of the securities markets
and of the securities industry. If one recognises that
each stock echange functions only as part of an Australia-wide
network and that to a very large degree, listed public
companies carry on their businesses on an Australia-wide
or national basis, then it should be obvious that the
problem of attaining effective, coherent and efficient
securities regulation can be solved only if there is one
nationally uniform body 6f law and a national authority
which will eliminate the variation of administrative
practice and interpretation and which will standardise
the quality of administrative action and investigation.
I mentioned the Terrigal Conference's statement
on the mixed economy. Equally important for business
is the decision to express a firmer commitment to economic
planning. Planning is really about institutionalising
foresight. It is a process which tempers expertise
with judgment. We believe that the Australian Government
should contain a department with the prime responsibility
for planning the long term future of the economy. It
should be staffed with experts, but advised by
representatives of various community groups especially
workers, employers and consumers. We considered, but
rejected, the notion of a National Economic Council because
although we believe that the views of community groups
are an essential part of the planning process, we believe
that ultimate power of decision must rest with the
Parliament. The planning machinery we are creating is
therefore advisory.
Market forces, alone, are not good enough as
indicators of the direction in which resources should flow.
The market mechanism is there to be used, but it must not
become the only influence determining how and where we
allocate our resources. 
We envisage a broadly based planning mechanism
at its centre, the planning department with its advisory
machinery; around it the other departments, but
especially the industry departments, each with its own
network of advisory bodies and panels. From this
mixture of expertise, judgment, subjective opinion,
and self-interest will come, I believe, the sort of
advise which, when combined with the more objective data
from the planning department, will enable the Government
to appraise its long term goals with more certainty, more
humanity and more efficiency than is possible at present.
Our commitment to planning is not simply based on
ideology not simply due to any mistrust of market forces.
It stems from the interdependent nature of a good deal of
economic decision-making. Much public investment has
long lead time and it is difficult to undertake major
development projects unless there is some certainty about
the continued supply of funds and avoidance of ' stop-go'
economic policies. The private sector, too, needs some clear view of
the Government's long term operations with confidence.
I envisage a fruitful, interactive planning environment
with both public and private sectors playing their part.
When we spekk of Australia's " mixed economy"
let's be clear what we mean. Public and private
sectors are mainly complementary, not competitive with
each other. The aim of the major initiatives my
Government has taken has been to build better structures,
more modern structures upon which the whole community
can propper. The private sector has a definite interest in
the development of public infrastructure and ' the
rational public regulation of private activity.
Important initiatives in public investment will prove
of great advantage to the private sector. I refer to
our assumption of responsibility for national highways
which are of such great importance in facilitating the
movement of goods among our major markets. Another
area of great long term interest for the private sector,
is the improvement of the quality of our education system
as a whole and particular major initiatives in areas of
direct concern to private industry, such as the
development of technical education. The private sector
will also see advantages from the re-organisation of
some major areas of public investment. I refer
particularly to the establishment of two Commissions to
conduct postal and telecommunication services. 
-6-
The Government has taken-new initiatives to
facilitate trade relations with other countries. A
large number of new trade agreements lave been sined.
We have extended the charter of the Old Bxport Payments
Insurance Corporation to create the Export Finance
Insurance Corporation and we shall proceed to establish
an Overseas Trade Corporation, to promote trade with
centrally planned economies in particular. We have
established new institutions to assist firms to adjust
to the continuing pressures of change. Our Structural
Adjustment Assistance Scheme is the first systematic
effort to help industry adjust to changes of economic
policy. The NEAT scheme is the first step in our
continuing development of longer-run manpower policy.
In a more specific area of housing, we have established a
Housing Standards Advisory Council to eliminate the
extraordinary cost disabilities of the multiplicity of
housing codes. In all these ways I believe that public
initiative is la)? ing the foundations for the future
balanced development for the private sector.
Far from these programs being antagonistic to
the success of private endeavour or incompatible with
private prosperity they are essential to it. A skilled,
healthy, efficient community that is both our national
goal and an economic necessity. In a speech last
December Mr Gordon Jackson had this to say:
" We should perhaps speculate that in a turbulent
and uncertain world, a principal role of government
should be to articulate a set of values that will find
acceptance in the community. Acceptance will help to
constrain the parts from antisocial and maladaptive
behaviour and will encourage progress towards common
ideals. The role of government also should be to
simplify the business environment enough for people to
understand the situation and the prospects, so they can
plan with confidence." I
I endorse thoserentarks.
Effective planning needs new structures and new
machinery, . We are building them. To articulate a
set of values which will find acceptance in the community
requires consultation. We are eager to have it.
In the present situation of rapid change and uncertainty
it is urgent that we should be able to apply ourselved
all of us, government and business alike to these tasks.
I won't labour the point I'll just leave you with this
thought: In this critical time it would be tragic for Australia
if over the next six months, our national preoccupations
were to be purely political, if the national debate
were to be conducted, not in terms of our greater goals
and long term needs, but were to be forced into the
narrow fcus of yet another election. 


This day, 8 March, 1975, and this gathering tonight have an historical significance far beyond the occasion. Today, International Women's Day, has been celebrated for well over sixty years as the day on which women, particularly working women, come together to make their voices heard and their problems known.
 This year, International Women's Year, is a year which has come into being because women like yourselves individual women, fighting *~ omen, women with determination and spirit have not easily taken no for an answer, have not believed those who told them " It is not women's work", or " It can not be done by women."
 International Women's Year, as all of you who fought and won and lost and came back to fight again will know, is not going to solve the problems of the world, the problems of women and through them of men and of children. It is however, our responsibility, the responsibility of you the women of Australia and of us your Government, to try to ensure that this year the world will be given a shove in the right direction a shove without which changes for the good of women, of all women, not just a few might never occur.
The history of International Women's Day is often traced back to 1909 when women garment workers poured out of every garment factory in New York, Brooklyn, Philadelphia and Chicago protesting against the sweatshop conditions under which they had to work. It was like a mighty army rising in the night and demanding to be heard. The response was violence, assault and arrest. Half the women were under the age of twenty. Their demands were for the organization of all workers into trade unions, for equal pay for equal work, and eight hour day, a living wage and full citizenship for women.
During the next eight years women workers all over the world rose and protested about their working conditions. Their demands were the same, and a further demand was added as the First World War approached the demand for peace, a protest against the ease with which the world was headed towards war. In 1910, it was proposed that March 8 should be set aside as a special day for women, a day to remind the world of women's demands for justice in the work force, for a place in society, for peace rather than violence and conflict.
Here in Australia we have the same splendid tradition a past of which we can be justly proud. Our women formed their own trade unions and rose up from their workbenches. The great seamstresses' strike of 1882, here in Melbourne, led not only to an improvement in the working conditions of their own industry but to a general investigation of the conditions under which both women and men were labouring. The findings of this inquiry were so appalling that they led to the formulation of the factory acts and other legislation aimed at protecting workers.
As the First World War approached our women were increasingly concerned by an easy acceptance of the inevitability of war. Many anti-war and anti-conscription women's groups were started, including the Women's Peace Army. Their fight for peace was untiring and uncompromising. When the Depression camne the women were not content to sit idle. Nor were they content viith the handing out of charity. Women's Employment Bureaux run by women and for women sprang up all over the country. Here in Victoria, clothing factories, jam factories and rural industries, to name but a few, were established to provide employment for unemployed and poverty-stricken women. The same happened throughout the rest of Australia.
In more recent times we have seen the wives of the Wollongong miners refuse to allow scab labour to work their husbands' mines. We have seen the women in a small factory in Whyalla refuse to be retrenched and set themselves up as a co-operative under their own management. Creating their own employment opportunities. And only weeks ago here in Melbourne there was the dramatic stand of a small group of women in the metal trades. Many women in Australia have stood up and fought for decent working conditions for women, for a living wage and for equal pay for work of equal value. Many women in Australia have marched through the streets on 8 March reminding us Australians of these demands and of the demand for peace.
This day in Australia is part of a tradition of which we can be truly proud. And it has not only been the women of Australia who have fought for justice for women in the workplace and for peace in the world. Men, too, have fought for these demands. Many men, too, have marched our streets demanding a rate for the job, peace and protection against unjst., laws.
The Federal Parliamentary Labor Party as early as 1901 accepted unanimously a motion that women should get not equal pay for equal work, but, much more significantly, equal. pay for work of equal value. The Labor Governments of Australia can be proud of our historical record in this area, a record not just of rhetoric but of action.
Immediately this Government came to power in December 1972 we abolished conscription and re-opened the National Wage Case arguing cogently and successfully for acceptance of the principle of equal pay for work of equal value. In May 1974 we again went to the Arbitration Commission arguing that, in all justice, women as well as men should be given a: minimum wage below which no human being should be asked to work. Both these judgements have been contentious: Just principles are rarely implemented without problems, but we are proud that we have not compromised our principles and by June of this year both these judgements will be fully implemented. This makes 8 March 1975 even more significant. I might mention here that an ILO Study has shown that in the year ending June 1974 the world's biggest increase in real wages for women in manufacturing industry went to Australian women. Then real wages went up by 16%. From December 1972 to the December quarter 1974 average minimum weekly award rates for women increased by 73%.
Equal pay alone will not bring about justice in the work force. We are aware of this and have shown this awareness in our actions. When this Government came to power in December 1972 its program for women was two-fold: First to correct the past injustices from which they had suffered and, secondly to lessen distress and suffering, to respond sensitively to social problems affecting women and children.
These latter problems, problems which have continually arisen within Australian Society, include the need for shelters, health centres, contraceptive advice, rape crisis centres, marital counselling, problems facing women with young children, their recreation and leisure needs, their need for company and ease of movement and programs relating to the welfare of women.
Shelters and refuges for women can be traced back beyond the work of Caroline Chisolm. An understanding of the pressing need for health services relating directly to the health problems of women gave birth in 1899 to the Queen Victoria Hospital here in Melbourne, staffed by and run for women. The welfare problems of women have been recoqnised and worked for by all the great women in the past. Catherine Spence, Vida Goldstein, Muriel Heagney, Rose Scott, Jessie Street, Edith Cowan are among the better known of these many, many women.
To this day the majority of poor people in Australia are women, including mothers many of them single or deserted mothers. The need to create a more humane world for these women is an overwhelming concern of this Government: We introduced the Supporting Mother's Benefit, we removed the sales tax on the pill, we are funding women'srefuges, women's health centres and family planning centres.
Perhaps the most exciting development has been the acceptance of the need for multi-purpose centres, centres concerned with all the needs of women in the area. The Hunter Region Working Women's Centre in Newcastle is one such centre. It will cater for women's health, welfare, educational, workforce and legal problems as well as providing recreation and child care facilities.
 To ensure that no area of need will be overlooked that no social problem relating to women, whether they be married or not, with or without children, aboriginal or newcomer, English speaking or not, young or old, rural or urban, will be hidden away, forgotten or neglected we have established a Royal Commission into Human Relationships. It is the First Royal Commission in history to investigate such social problems.
 Of the first kind of demand, the demand for fairness and for justice, we have again shown a sensitivity to the existence of these problems and a determination to understand and overcome them.
 Our concern has been for women at home as well as at work, for women in the unpaid as well as in the paid workforce. We have introduced anti-discrimination committees throughout Australia, new training and retraining opportunities. We have made every effort to ensure that * unemployed or retrenched women are not overlooked. We have also, in exempting the matrimonial home from the dutiable value of the family's estate, publicly recognised for the first time in the history of Australia that the person who looks after the home and family contributes as much to the economic value of that family's home as the person who goes to work.
 Further, mothers, indeed parents, whether they remain at home or are in the paid workforce, need help and support in the care of their children.
 In the last year Australia has introduced a program of childhood services the first of its kind in the world. It is not designed to impose an arbitrary blueprint on the children of Australia and their parents. Rather it is to be flexible enough and integrated enough to respond at the neighbourhood level to all their needs.
 This program has begun to be implemented and million has been set aside for this financial year alone. Many of the projects being funded under this scheme are innovative and 6xciting, and the implementation of this program is going ahead as fast as is humatly possible. It will be some years however, before its effects become widely visible, before the present overwhelming needs will be satisfied.
No matter how genuine our attempts to ensure that women at work and at home are justly cared for, it is the range of possibilities, expectations and limitations which are instilled in girls in school which limit the scope of their later aspirations and determine the patterns of their future life. The importance of education as the major determinant of a child's future and the role that education has to play in motivating women to take up the challenge of new roles and of new life patterns is now being recognised.
These changes which we have undertaken, changes essential to emotional and financial independence and to the ability of women to choose freely the future which best suits her, are based on principles of equity and fairness, on our desire to correct injustices. We take great pride in these advances and achievements. It is nevertheless clear that many problems remain.
Too few women have been involved in making decisions at all levels of Government, in the Public Service, in the political parties and in the trade unions. Decisions which affect their lives both as women and as citizens. This must concern not only my Government but the whole Australian Parliament, the State Parliaments, local government authorities and all other bodies whose day-to-day decisions on matters of policy and practice affect the lives of all people, not just men.
 Because of this concern the Australian Government has decided that as part of Australia's activities for International Women's Year a conference should be held in Canberra later this year on the theme of women and politics. It is hoped that this conference will be open to all women and women's groups and that all political parties and other relevant organizations will play a part. The intention is not only to discuss past and present participation by women in political activities but also to bring about a greater understanding of the means by which women can participate in the making of political decisions and the difficulties that confront them in. so doing. Women from other countries who, through their elected or appointed positions have contributed to political change or women who have brought about significant social or political achievements from outside government, will also be invited to participate.
 The major problem, however, in the course of this year is to ensure that our efforts are more than a fleeting, token gesture to lull women into a false belief that their problems are at last being taken seriously and understood in all their complexity. My Government has not committed itself and will not commit itself to any program which it does not genuinely believe is both desired by the women of Australia   and which will be of lasting benefit to them. During International Women's Year we are advancing and extending programs which we had already undertaken in response to the needs of women. But our overriding task and challenge for this year is to strike out at the attitudes which cause these difficulties and give rise to these problems.
We must challenge notions such as that of the breadwinner and the homemaker; values such as those of ambition, prestige, status and incessant promotion; dichotomies such as that between work and home; the hidden and usually unarticulated assumptions about women's abilities, capacities, life patte-rns, needs, skills and desires. These affect women not only in their employment but in the whole range of their opportunities in life. Both men and women must be made aware of our habitual patterns of prejudice which we often do not see as such but whose existence manifests itself in our language and our behaviour.
 During this year, International Women's Year, we must question, discuss and reassess the attitudes, assumptions, beliefs and prejudices that society holds about women. We must create a society in which a woman's place is where she freely chooses to be, from which neither cultural prejudices, lack. of education or lack of self-confidence will keep her.
Today, International Women's Day, is a start towards this. This year, International Women's Year, we must work towards a society which eases the stresses placed upon men in the workforce, which recognises that home is a place for men as wdl as women, but which insists that women have a place with men in the total Australian society.
My Government has always been committed to the theme of enlarging and equalising opportunities for all Australians, the theme of creating a more humane, a more compassionate society for Australians, the need to instil in women self-confidence and a sense of independence, the need to see more clearly each other's abilities and potential. We shall never be content with a society which buys its prosperity, its well-being at the expense of some other part of that society. We, all of us, men and women, would be diminished by such a society.
I have no doubt that you, the women of Australia, have carefully watched the changes that have come about in the last two years. For these are the changes which you yourselves have fought for so bravely. This Government may not always have done them in the way that you thought best, but we have done them sincerely and to the best of our ability. More significantly, our successes rest upon and are due to your determination, your experiences, your defeats and your successes.



( ADDRESS TO BE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER) 4
NOTES FOR LABOR DAY DINNER SPEECH' 9
VICTORIAN I1RADLS HALL COUNCIL
LOWER MLLBUURNJE TOWN HALL
SATURDAY 8 MA~ RCH, 1975
EIGHT YEARS AGO THIS WEEKEND I FIRST RESPONDED
TO THIS TOAST As LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY.
WE AT A CRITICAL STAGE IN THE HISTORY OF
THE MOVEMENT AN. D THE PARTY.
I SAID THEN: " POLITICAL OPPOSITI'ON IS NO
SUBSTITUTE FOR POLITICAL POWER. THE REAL
TEST OF WHAT WE CALL OUR PRINCIPLES IS NOT
THEIR PRESUMED PURITY BUT THEIR PRACTICAL
APPLICATION." EIGHT YEARS LATER THE CONTEXT IS VERY DIFFERENT..*
BUT THE RELEVANCE OF THOSE REMARKS REMAINS.
EIGHT YEARS AGO AFTER THE DEBACLE OF 1966 THERE WAS
A VERY REAL QUESTION OF WHETHER THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY WOULD EVER FORM A NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
AGAINt THERE WERE POWERFUL FORCES AT WORK FOR THE
DISINTEGRATION OF THE PARTY. THEY WERE
STRONGEST IN THIS STATE 4!. 
-2-
Now WE HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN TWO NATIONAL
ELECTIONS WITHI[ J 1.8 MONTHS OF EACH OTHER.
THE TWO-YEARS-AND-THREE-MONTHS WE HAVE
HAD IN OFFICE HARDLY CONSTITUTE THE DEFINITIVE
TEST OF OUR ABILITY TO CARRY OUT OUR PROGRAM,
TWICE PRESENTED TO THE . PEOPLE ON THE BASIS OF
A THREE-YEAR PROGRAM$
OUR DIFFICULTIES HAVE BEEN COMPOUNDED BY THE
UNREMITTING OBSTRUCTION IN THE SENATE AND THE
UNRELENTING HOSTILITY OF AN OPPOSITION WHICH
JUST WON'T ACCEPT THE PEOPLE'S VERDICT,
AND FURTHER NOT FOR THE FIRST TIME AN
AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT FINDS ITSELF IN
POWER AT A TIME OF PROFOUND INTERNATIONAL
DIFFICULTY$ DESPITE THESE FACTORS* DESPITE THESE PRESSURES
FROM HOME AND ABROAD I BELIEVE WE HAVE
DEMONSTRATED THE TRUTH OF WHAT I SAID EIGHT
YEARS AGO THE OVERRIDING IMPORTANCE OF OUR
ABILITY THROUGH PARLIAMENT TO PUT OUR
PROGRAM INTO PRACTICE$ 3/, 
-3-
WE CAN LOOK AT IT TWO WAYS,
THERE IS THE NEGATIVE WAY TO THINK OF THE
APPALLING ALTERNATIVE,
THERE IS THE POSITIVE WAY WHAT OUR PROGRAM
AND OUR POLICIES MEAN FOR THE VAST MAJORITY
OF OUR SUPPORTERS AND FELLOW CITIZENS OF
AUSTRALIA,,"
ONE MUST GIVE SOME SORT OF CREDIT WHERE CREDIT
IS DUE; AND THIS MUCH AT LEAST MUST BE SAID
FOR OUR OPPONENTS$ WE'VE HAD THE SIDE-EFFECT
OF MAKING THEM COME CLEAN ABOUT THEIR INTENTIONS.
To PROVE HIS TOUGHNESS, TO PROVE HIS ORTHODOXY,
MR SNEDDEN HAS DECLARED THAT HE WOULD UNDO MOST
OF WHAT LABOR HAS DONE.
To PROVE HIS OWN PARTICULAR BRAND OF TOUGHNESSi
MR MALCOLM FRASER, MR SNEDDEN'S RIVAL, HAS
REVEALED HIS INDUSTRIAL PLANS A RETURN TO THE
PENAL'CLAUSES, JAIL SENTENCES FOR MEMBERS AS
WELL AS OFFICIALS, A COMPLETE WAGE FREEZE$
A NETWORK OF INFORMERS AND INTIMIDATION WITHIN
THE UNIONS.
You CAN'T SAY WE HAVEN'T BEEN WARNED, 11, q/ 
IT IS TRUE T1lAT LIBERAL POLICIES CHANGE
WITH THE OPINION POLLS$
AFTER THEIR D7F7AT IN 1972 TIITY MADE SOME
TOKEN ATTEMPT TO RECOVER THE M4IDDLE-GROUND.
THE TRENDIES HAD THEIR LITTLE DAY.
HAMER WAS GOING TO MAKE THINGS HAPPEN BUT
WHEN IN THE FACE OF OUR ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES
THE POLLS BEGAN TO CHANGE, IT WAS A DIFFERENT
STORY,
OUR OPPONENTS BEGAN TO THINK THAT THEY COULD
GET AWAY WITH ANYTHING,
THEY STOPPED WORRYING ABOUT THE PUBLIC AND
BEGAN DEVOTING THEIR ENERGIES TO THE BATTLE FOR
THE LEADERSHIP.
THIS BATTLE IS NOW REACHING DECISION POINT.
THIS WEEK IN CANBERRA THE DOGS WERE WERE WOOF
WOOFING IT SNEDDEN MUST GO.
BUT HOWEVER IT TURNS OUT WE NOW KNOW FROM THEIR
OWN DECLARATIONS THAT THE LIBERAL ALTERNATIVE
IS BENT UPON DISMANTLING AND DESTRUCTION
BENT UPON A COURSE OF SOCIAL REACTION AND ECONOMIC
AND INDUSTRIAL REPRESSION.
So THAT IS THE NEGATIVE SIDE OF WHY IT IS SO
CRUCIAL$ 6 O o5/ 1 a 
THE DAMAGE THREATENED BY OUR OPPONENTS' RETURN
GOES BEYOND THE THREAT OF OBSTRUCTION OF OUR
MOST IMPORTANT PROGRAMS EDUCATION, CITIES,
WELFARE, HEALTH. THEY WOULD THREATEN THE
LIVING STANDARDS OF THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY
OF EMPLOYEES, THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIAN MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE IN EMPLOYMENT$
A REPORT BY THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
PUBLISHED LAST WEEK SINGLES OUT AUSTRALIAN
WOMEN WORKERS AS THE RECIPIENTS OF THE BIGEST
INCREASE IN REAL WAGES IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
IN THE WORLD IN 1974.
AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF ONLY SIX COUNTRIES WHERE THE
BUYING POWER OF THE PAY PACKET IMPROVED SIGNIFICANTLY
LAST YEAR. THE OTHERS ARE BELGIUMI KOREA, NORWAY, a
POLAND AND YUGOSLAVIA$
FROM THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1972 TO THE SEPTEMBER
QUARTER LAST YEAR PRICES ROSE 27-PER CENT BUT
AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS ROSE 40 PER CENT. IN THAT
PERIOD MINIMUM WEEKLY WAGES FOR MEN ROSE BY
47 PER CENT AND FOR WOMEN 68 PER CENTO REAL
WEEKLY EARNINGS BEFORE TAX ROSE BY 10.4 PER CENT
AND AFTER TAX By 7.5 PER CENTS v o s6/ a 
-6-
EVERY COMPARABLE COUNTRY IN THE WORLD HAS
SUFFERED RISING UNEMPLOYMENT AND RISING PRICES,
CERTAINLY THE PRESENT UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS
TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE AND WE ARE FIGHTING IT ON
ALL FRONTS, BUT AUSTRALIA AMONG THE COUNTRIES
SUFFERING THE SAME PROBLEMS HAS BEEN OUTSTANDINGLY
SUCCESSFUL IN MAINTAINING AND INCREASING THE
REAL VALUE OF WAGES FOR THOSE IN EMPLOYMENT.
THAT IS WHAT IS BEHIND THE CONCERN EXPRESSED BY
JIM CAIRNS AND ME-ABOUT THE CONSEQUENCES OF
EXCESSIVE WAGE CLAIMS THIS YEAR. IT'S NOT A
MATTER OF BLAMING UNIONS OR UNION OFFICIALS$
WE DO WANT, HOWEVER, TO SEE THAT THE VALUE OF WAGE
INCREASES IS A REAL ONE NOT JUST A PAPER INCREASE.
AND WE DO WANT TO SEE THAT WORKERS DO NOT PRICE
THEMSELVES OR THEIR FELLOW-WORKERS OUT OF JOBS.*
DON'T LET' S HAVE ANY OF THIS NONSE NSE THAT
EITHER THE AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL SYSTEM OR THE
ECONOMIC SYSTEM MAKES IT IMPOSSIBLE* FOR A LABOR
GdVERNMENT TO APPLY LABOR PRINCIPLES.
I KNOW HOW FRUSTRATING THE SYSTEM CAN BE.
IT IS DOUBLY SO WHEN WE HAVE AN OPPOSITION-SUCH
AS THE PRESENT ONE, DETERMINED TO OBSTRUCT AND
DESTORY BY WHATEVER MEANS AT ITS DISPOSAL.
o* 971@ 
-7-
YET DESPITE ALL THE DIFFICULTIES THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS WORKING.
WE HAVE USED THE SYSTEM TO SECURE THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
RE-DISTRIBUTION OFWEALTHEVER TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.
WE HAVE USED IT TO SECURE THE MOST SIGNIFICANT
INCREASE IN REAL INCOMES FOR THE OVERWHELMING
MAJORITY ACHIEVED SINCE THE WAR -THIS DESPITE THE
WORLD-WIDE INFLATION, DESPITE THE WORLD-WIDE UPWARD
TREND IN UNEMPLOYMENT.
ABOVE ALL, WE HAVE USED IT TO IMPLEMENT OUR PROGRAM*
WE HAVE IMPLEMENTED AN EXTRAORDI1NARY PROPORTION OF
THE PROGRAM ON WHICH WE WERE TWICE ELECTED -AND
THIS DESPITE THE UNPARALLELLED OBSTRUCTION IN THE
SENATE AND THE LACK OF CO-OPERATION FROM THE STATES.
TRUE THE FEDERAL SYSTEM CREATES EXTRAORDINARY
DIFFICULTIES FOR A SOCIAL DEMOCRAT GOVERNMENT.
YET-WE ARE MAKING REMARKABLE HEADWAY. THERE IS
CERTAINLY-NO CAUSE FUR LOS ING FAITH IN OUR CAPACITY
TO ACHIEVE OUR OBJECTIVES, TO IMPLEMENT OUR
PROGRAM, TO APPLY OUR PRINCIPLES, ANY MORE THAN
THERE IS CAUSE TO LOSE FAITH IN OURSELVES AS A
PARTY, AS THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN ENTRUSTED
BY THE PEOPLE WITH THE LEADERSHIP OF THIS NATION. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., M. P. o
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY ZONE 1 CONFERENCE
LANE COVE TOWN HALL, SUNDAY 9 MARCH 1975
THE POLITICS OF MEDIBANK
THE OPPOSITION'S THREAT TO MEDIBANK SYMBOLIZES AND
ENCAPSULES THEIR WHOLE DESTRUCTIVE AND NEGATIVE APPROACH TO
NATIONAL ISSUES TODAY.
1; IT PERFECTLY ILLUSTRATES THEIR CONTEMPT OF THE WILL
OF THE PEOPLE AND THEIR REFUSAL TO ACCEPT THE PEOPLE S
VERDICT. LABOR'S HEALTH INSURANCE PROPOSALS WERE
FIRST PUT BEFORE THE ELECTORATE IN DETAIL AT THE
ELECTIONS OF 1969 ELECTIONS IN WHICH THE LABOR PARTY
GAINED 17 SEATS. THEY WERE AGAIN CENTRAL TO OUR
POLICIES ON WHICH WE WON THE 1972 ELECTIONS. THEY
WERE SPELT OUT AGAIN IN 1974. INDEED, THE HEALTH
INSURANCE COMMISSION ACT WAS ONE OF THE. SIX BILLS
REJECTED TN THE SENATE ON WHICH THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
WAS GRANTED A DOUBLE DISSOLUTION AFTER THE SENATE'S
REFUSAL OF SUPPLY. As THE MELBOURNEAGE SAID YESTERDAY:
" THE BROAD HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMME IS ALREADY LAW,
IT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY PARLIAMENT. IT HAS TWICE
BEEN THE ? RINC! PAL PLANK IN A WINNING ELECTION POLICY,
IF EVER THE WHITLAM GOVERNMENT HAD THE RIGHT TO CLAIM
A MANDATE FOR ANYTHING IT IS FOR THE HEALTH SCHEME," 
-2-
2. THE OPPOSITION'S ATTITUDE IS A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF THE
USE OF THE SENATE TO FRUSTRATE NOT JUST THE ELECTED GOVERNMENT
BUT THE CLEAR DECISION OF THE PEOPLE. THE HEALTH INSURANCE
COMMISSION IS NOW ESTABLISHED BY THE LAW OF THE LAND AS ARESULT
OF THE JOINT SITTING LAST AUGUST. WHEN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AND THE SENATE TOGETHER PASSED THE BILL INTO LAW THE OPPOSITION
THEN USED ITS NUMBERS IN THE SENATE TO PREVENT PASSAGE OF THE
HEALTH INSURANCE LEVYASSESSMENT BILLS TO FUND MEDIBANKS
IS
3. I/ AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE WAY IN WHICH THE OPPOSITION NOW-.
OPPOSES MEASURES WHICH THEY THEMSELVES PROPOSED OR INITIATED IN
GOVERNMENT. SINCE THE JOINT SITTING THE OPPOSITION IN THE
SENATE HAS TWICE EXCLUDED FROM A NATIONAL HEALTH BILL PROVISIONS
WHICH WERE-RECOMMENDED SIX YEARS AGO BY THE NIMMO COMMITTEE AND
WHICH FIVE YEARS AGO LAST WEEK DR FORBES WHEN MINISTER FOR
HEALTH SAID THAT THE GORTON GOVERNMENT WOULD ADOPT.
4I, MR. SNEDDEN'S WRITHINGS AND WRIGGLINGS IN HIS EFFORTS fO
RECONCILE HIS STATEMENTS WITH MR ANTHONY'S IS A CARICATURE OF
LEADERSHIP. THE COUNTRY PARTY TAIL IS WAGGING THE LIBERAL.
WOOF WOOF. MR ANTHONY OPPOSES MEDIBANK ONLY BECAUSE HE IS
DESPERATE THAT AN ELECTION BE HELD BEFORE THE NEXT RE-DISTRIBUTION
CAN GUARANTEE AUSTRALIANS EQUAL ELECTORATES AS PROVIDED BY THE LAW
OF THE LAND ANOTHER PROPOSITION ENDORSED BY THE PEOPLE LAST MAY
AND APPROVED AT THE JOINT SITTING IN AUGUST. IT IS QUITE
IMMATERIAL TO HIM THAT HIS LIBERAL ALLIES SUFFER AS MUCH FROM
THE PRESENT APPORTIONMENT AS THE-LABOR PARTY.
( MITCHELL, LIB, 29.98 ABOVE THE QUOTA; ROBERTSON, LAB, 25.29
ABOVE THE QUOTA; CALARE, 16,82 BELOW THE QUOTA;
HUME, 20.73 BELOW THE QUOTA; GWYDIR, 16.96 BELOW
THE QUOTA.) I 3/ I 
AND IT IS SYMPTOMATIC OF THE PRESENT STATE OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
THAT IT WILL MEEKLY ACCEPT THIS DICTATION AND THIS INJUSTICE,
THE ATTITUDE OF THE NON-LABOR STATES ILLUSTRATES THE
PHONINESS OF THEIR " STATES' RIGHTS" SLOGANEERING WHEN IT COMES
TO A MATTER OF THE PEOPLEIS RIGHTS. IN N. SW, DAILY CHARGES FOR
PUBLIC WARD BEDS WERE LIFTED TO $ 30, EXACTLY DOUBLE THE CHARGE
IN JULY 1972, NSW, STANDS TO LOSE $ 30 MILLION IN 1975/ 76 IF
IT REFUSES TO OPERATE MEDIBANK,
6. THE WHOLE BUSINESS IS DESIGNED TO DRAG OUT THE DEBATE, TO
OBSCURE THE BASIC ISSUE SO THAT PEOPLE WILLEBECOME THOROUGHLY
CONFUSED AND THOROUGHLY DISILLUSIONED. THE FACT IS THAT HOWEVER
HEALTH INSURANCE IS FINANCED, HOWEVER MEDIBANK' IS FUNDED,
MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL TREATMENT WILL NOT COST A CENT MORE. WE
HAVE TO FACE THE FACT THAT AN INCREASING PERCENTAGE OF THE
i ATIONAL INCOME WILL'BE APPLIED TO HEALTH. IT IS IRRELEVANT
WHETHER THIS IS CHANNELLED THROUGH THE PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS OR
THROUGH MEDIBANK HOWEVER FUNDED. THE ONLY SIGNIFICANT RESULT
IN OVERALL COST IS THAT MEDIBANK WILL BE LESS EXPENSIVE TO
ADMINISTER THAN HEALTH INSURANCE ADMINISTERED BY MORE THAN 100
PRIVATE BUREAUCRACIES PRESENTLY OPERATING IN AUSTRALIA.
7. AS FAR AS THE GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED MEDIBANK IS THE LAW
OF THE LAND. WE WILL APPLY THAT LAW AND WE'WILL COMPLY WITH IT,
, m D 



VICTORIAN AL. P. CONFERENCE
NATIONAL SCIENCE CENTRE, PARKSVILLE,
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR WHITLAM,
SUNDAY, 23 MARCH, 1975.
THE CONTINUING LEADERSHIP CRISIS IN THE LIBERAL
PARTY IS NOW IN ITS NINTH YEAR/ THERE IS NO REASON TO
BELIEVE THAT. LAST FRIDAY'S DECISION HAS REALLY SETTLED
ANYTHINGx THE WAR OF THE LIBERAL SUCCESSION HAS BECOME
WAR BY ATTRITIONX THERE MAY BE, AFTER THE MELODRAMA OF
THE LAST FORTNIGHT, A PERIOD OF TEMPORARY TRUCE, BUT IT
WILL BE ONLY THE PEACE OF EXHAUSTIONX FOR THE FACT
REMAINS THAT IN ALL THOSE NINE YEARS OF STRUGGLE AND
BLOOD-LETTING, IN ALL THOSE SEVEN CONTESTS INVOLVING
CHALLENGES TO THE LEADERSHIP, THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A REAL
DEBATE ABOUT ISSUES, ABOUT THE DIRECTION THE LIBERAL
PARTY SHOULD TAKE OR ABOUT THE DIRECTION IT WANTS
AUSTRALIA TO TAKEX
THE MOST DEPRESSING ASPECT OF THE CRISIS IN THE
LIBERAL PARTY HAS BEEN, AND REMAINS, THE FUNDAMENTAL
TRIVIALITY OF THE TERMS IN WHICH THE DEBATE HAS BEEN
CONDUCTEDX NONE OF THE PROTAGONISTS S: EM TO BE AWARE
THAT A CHANGE IN PARTY LEADERSHIP HAS DEEP IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE DIRECTION THAT PARTY WILL TAKEX AND THIS IS HOW
IT HAS BEEN FOR NEARLY A DECADEX 
-2-
THE DESTRUCTION OF SO MANY LIBERAL LEADERS GOES
DEEPER THAN THE MERE CONFLICT OF PERSONALITIES AND
PERSONAL AMBITIONS, PRETTY SAVAGE AS THAT HAS BEEN; IT
HAS BEEN A DIRECT RESULT OF THE SHEER NEGATIVISM OF THE
LIBERAL PARTY&gt; THE
EXCRUCIATING BARRENESS OF THE LIBERAL APPROACH HAS BEEN
PAINFULLY EXPOSED IN THE PAST TWO YEARS)
WHEN THE APPARATUS OF GOVERNMENT WAS TAKEN AWAY AFTER
23 YEARS, THE LIBERALS HAD PRECIOUS LITTLE TO SAY OR TO
DO) YOU REMEMBER THAT WHEN THEY FORCED ON THE. MAY
ELECTIONS THEY TOOK A WEEK OFF TO DEVISE POLICIES FOR
THE ELECTION) WE'VE HEARD NOTHING OF THEM SINCEX ALL
WE HAD WAS A PRE-OCCUPATION WITH TACTICS ELECTORAL
TACTICS, PARLIAMENTARY TACTICS AND ABOVE ALL, ULTIMATELY
FATAL TO BILL SNEDDEN, PARTY TACTICSy AND IN THIS SENSE
BILL SNEDDEN HAS BEEN A VICTIM-OF LIBERAL PARTY NEGATIVENESSA
THE ABSORPTION WITH TACTICS, THE DELIBERATE DAMAGING
CREATION OF ELECTION HYSTERIA, INEVITABLY MEANT A PRE-OCCUPATION
WITH PERSONALITIES RATHER THAN POLICIES, PERSONAL
CONFRONTATION RATHER THAN DEVELOPMENT OF RELEVANT POLICIESx
YOU HEAR A GREAT DEAL OF TALK ABOUT PARLIAMENTARY
PERFORMANCESX OF COURSE, THAT IS AN IMPORTANT ASPECT OF
POLITICS IN A PARLIAMENTARY SYSTEMx IT IS A TEST, A VALID
TEST OF LEADERSHIP BUT IT IS ONLY ONE OF MANYX BUT IN
THEIR SELF-CREATED OBSESSION WITH ELECTIONS, THE LIBERALS
TOOK A SINGLE POOR PERFORMANCE IN PARLIAMENT AS A CATASTROPHE) 
-3-
BECAUSE THERE IS NO ESSENTIAL UNDERPINNING OF A
POLICY, OF A PHILOSOPHY, OF ANYTHING THAT COULD BE
DESCRIBED AS A WELL MOTIVATED, PURPOSEFUL PARTY,
PERSONALITIES HAVE BECOME EVERYTHING TO THE LIBERALSX
THE THREAT OF USING THE SENATE TO FORCE OUT THE
ELECTED GOVERNMENT TO FALSIFY DEMOCRACY ONCE AGAIN
WAS AN ATTEMPT TO MAKE US LOSE OUR NERVE; ALL THAT HAS
HAPPENED IS THAT THE LIBERALS HAVE LOST THEIR HEADx
I NOTE THAT MR FRASER HAS STATED THE CORRECT DEMOCRATIC
PRINCIPLE THAT A GOVERNMENT SUSTAINED BY A COMFORTABLE
AND ASSURED MAJORITY IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, THE
PEOPLE'S HOUSE, SHOULD RUN THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH IT
WAS ELECTEDX TRUE, HE QUALIFIES THIS SOMEWHAT BY CURIOUS
REFERENCES TO CATCHING ME WITH MY PANTS DOWNX I'M SURE I
DON'T KNOW WHAT HE MEANSX
THE PEOPLE ARE ENTITLED TO INSIST THAT MR FRASER
STICKS TO HIS ORIGINAL UNDERTAKING HIS FIRST PROMISE. AS
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION THAT THE DECISION THE PEOPLE
MADE LAST MAY WILL BE ADHERED TOx AFTER ALL, IT IS MY
PREROGATIVE AS PRIME MINISTER TO ADVISE THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL
WHEN, AND ON WHAT GROUNDS, AN ELECTION WILL BE CALLEDx
4 
IF I WERE ABSORBED IN THE BATTLE OF PARLIAMENTARY AND
ELECTORAL TACTICS I COULD CALL ONE NOW,( I HAVE EVERY
GROUNDJ FOR ITx I ALREADY HAVE THE GROUNDS FOR A DOUBLE
DISSOLUTION I COULD TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE. PRESENT
DISARRAY OF THE LIBERAL PARTY&amp; I COULD BE AS-FULLY
JUSTIFIED IN THAT COURSE AS SIR ROBERT MENZIES WAS IN 1955,
BARELY A YEAR AFTER THE 1954 ELECTIONSA I FORBEARA THE
SMASHING ADVANTAGE WE WOULD HAVE COULD NOT JUSTIFY THE
DAMAGE YET ANOTHER INTERRUPTION A SUSPENSIOR OF THE PROPER
BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT FOR THREE OR FOUR MONTHS WOULD DOA
WHAT REMAINS TO BE SEEN IS WHETHER MR FRASER WAS REALLY
STATING A PRINCIPLE OR AN EXPEDIENTA. FOR IN HIS SITUATION
IT IS CERTAINLY NO SACRIFICE ON HIS PART TO ABJURE AN EARLY
ELECTIONx, THE REAL TEST OF HIS CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES
IS YET TO COMEX
AND OF COURSE ALL HIS REAL TESTS ARE YET TO COME,
FOR A MAN WHO HAS BEEN IN PARLIAMENT 20 YEARS, MR FRASER
IS CURIOUSLY UNKNOWN. A THERE IS NOBODY SO PROMINENT IN
PUBLIC LIFE WHOSE STANCE ON THE WIDER RANGE OF ISSUES IS
SUCH AN ENIGMAL ONLY JOHN GORTON CLAIMS TO KNOW WHAT HE
REALLY STANDS FOR$ e 
BUT HIS CRUCIAL TESTS IN THI IMMEDIATE FUTURE ARE
THESE:-HIS ATTITUDE TO SENATE OBSTRUCTION
HIS RELATIONS WITH THE COUNTRY PARTY
( REDISTRIBUTION)
HIS ATTITUDE TO THE IRRESPONSIBILITY
AND SOCIAL SABOTAGE OF THE ANTI-LABOR
STATES. ( VIC, CHALLENGE MEDIBANK)
THESE THREE MATTERS ARE CLOSELY CONNECTEDK AFTER
ALL, ONE OF THE FUSES WHICH SET OFF LAST WEEK'S EXPLOSION
WAS MR ANTHONY'S THREAT TO BLOCK MEDIBANK IN THE SENATE
AND THE REFUSAL OF THE ANTI-LABOR STATES TO CO-OPERATE IN
MAKING MEDIBANK WORK RAISES A GREAT NATIONAL ISSUE WHICH,
HAD WE BEEN FORCED INTO IT, WE SHOULD HAVE BEEN PERFECTLY
PREPARED TO FIGHT ON FOR THE FOURTH TIMEX
MR FRASER HAS ACKNOWLEDGED THAT MEDIBANK IS THE LAW
OF THE LAND AND THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS THE RIGHT TO BE ABLE
TO APPLY THE LAW AND COMPLY WITH ITA BUT HIS GESTURE IS
MEANINGLESS UNLESS HE IS PREPARED TO USE HIS INFLUENCE ON
HIS COLLEAGUES IN THE NON-LABOR STATES TO GET THEM TO STOP
SHILLY-SHALLYING AND TO STOP PLAYING AR) UND WITH THE HEALTH
AND WELL-BEING OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLEX a 
THE VICTORIAN PREMIER AND THE VICTORIAN MINISTER
FOR HEALTH, MR SCANLAN, NOW PLEAD FOR MORE TIMES
WHAT ARE THE FACTS?
THERE WERE INITIAL MEETINGS BETWEEN BILL HAYDEN AND
THE VICTORIAN HEALTH MINISTER ON MEDIBANK IN OCTOBER AND
NOVEMBER 1973. y,
I WROTE TO MR HlAMER ON 15 AUGUST, 1974 SETTING OUT
OUR PROPOSALS)( SAID:
" NOW THAT THE HEALTH INSURANCE ACT HAS BEEN PASSED
BY THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT, I AM NOW IN A POSITION* TO
PUT TO YOUR GOVERNMENT A FIRM PROPOSAL FOR AN AGREEMENT
WITH my GOVERNMENT CONCERNING THE PROVISION OF HOSPITAL
SERVICES AND THE FINANCING OF PUBLIC HOSPITAL OPERATING COSTSA
THE OBJECTIVES OF THE AGREEMENTS WILL BE TO'
ENSURE THAT EVERY PERSON HAS ACCESS TO COMPREHENSIVE HOSPITAL
CARE, INCLUDING MEDICAL TREATMENT, PROVIDED FREE OF CHARGE
IN STANDARD BEDS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN A WAY THAT WILL NOT
PLACE ANY IMPEDIMENT IN THE WAY OF PERSONS BEING ABLE TO
SEEK PRIVATE TREATMENT-IN PUBLIC HOSPITALS, IF. THEY SO WISHX
_ F_ 
-7-
" to Tills END, TI1E TI:. a1; () 17 [ HiE AGREIMEIIf S WILL VISUALISE
TIlE REMOVAL, WHERE APPLICABLE, OF MEANS TESTS WHICH
DECIDE ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION TO STANDARD BED PUBLIC
HOSPITAL ACCOMMODATION AND TREATMENT; ABOLITION OF STANDARD
WARD FEES; THE PROVISION OF FREE MEDICAL SERVICES TO
HOSPITAL PATIENTS; THE METHOD OF PAYMENT OF DOCTORS
PROVIDING MEDICAL SERVICES TO HOSPITAL PATIENTS AND THE
SETTING OF SPECIFIED FEES TO BE CHARGED FOR CERTAIN CATEGORIES
OF INPATIENTSI " FOR ITS PART, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL UNDERTAKE
TO MAKE PAYMENTS TO BOTH INDIVIDUAL HOSPITALS AND STATE PUBLIC
HOSPITAL AUTHORITIES WHICH WOULD AMOUNT TO 50% OF THE NET
OPERATING COSTS OF THE PUBLIC HOSPITALS IN THE STATES"
I RECEIVED AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT4 ON 5 SEPTEMBER BILL
HAYDEN WROTE TO MR SCANLAN SETTING OUT THE MATTERS TO BE
SORTED OUT AT THE OFFICIAL LEVELf,
ON 2 DECEMBER I WROTE AGAIN TO MR HAMER SEEKING AN
EARLY DECLARATION OF THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE,( 
-8-
ON 12 DECEMBER MY DEPARTMENT RECEIVED AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
FROM THE SECRETARY OF THE PREMIER'S DEPARTMENT(
AND ON FRIDAY ( 21 MARCH 1975) I AT LAST RECEIVED A
REPLY FROM MR HAMER SAYING,'" MR SCANLAN IS SEEKING EARLY
DISCUSSIONS WITH MR HAYDEN TO CLARIFY THE OUTSTANDING ISSUES.",
THAT'S HOW HAMER MAKES THINGS HAPPEN&amp; 9/, 
-9-
WE ARE ALSO ENTITLED TO KNOW MR FRASER'S ATTITUDE
TO THE POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF THE VICTORIAN CHALLENGE IN
THE HIGH COURT TO THE VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLANX THERE ARE 57 PROGRAMS IMPERILED BY THIS CHALLENGE
SOME OF THEM INITIATED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF WHICH MR FRASER
WAS A MEMBERK THE POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS CHALLENGE
IS THAT IT IS ONE OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE VERY RAPID
SHIFT TO THE RIGHT, THE SHIFT TOWARDS REACTION WHICH IS
TAKING PLACE IN THE LIBERAL PARTY, NOT LEAST HERE IN VICTORIAK
MR FRASER'S STANCE ON THIS MATTER NOT JUST THE CHALLENGE
BUT ON ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR WEAKENING THE NATION'S WELFARE
SYSTEM WILL BE A CRITICAL TEST ABOUT WHERE HE REALLY
WANTS TO TAKE HIS PARTYK 
JUST AS CRUCIAL FOR TIE FUTURE ( O THE LIBERAL PARTY
WILL BE MR FRASER'S ATTITUDE TO OUR FIGHT FOR EOUAL
ELECTORATES THAT TIIE VOTE OF EACH AUSTRALIAN WILL HAVE
EQUAL WORTH WHEREVER HE OR SHE LIVES.
ONE OF THE REAL SIGNIFICANT RESULTS OF LAST FRIDAY'S
DECISION WAS TO REDUCE TO ALMOST NOTHING THE REPRESENTATION
OF METROPOLITAN ELECTORATES AT THE LEADERSHIP LEVEL OF THE
COALITION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. OF THE FOUR
ONLY MR LYNCH NOW REPRESENTS SUCH AN AREA. So I DON'T SEE
MUCH REASON TO MODIFY THE STATEMENT THAT METROPOLITAN
REPRESENTATION THE EFFECTIVE VOICE OF AREAS TYPICAL OF
WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS LIVE HAS BEEN REDUCED TO ALMOST
NOTHING. 11/ 
-11.-
MR SNEDDEN LEIT OFFICE ON FRIDAY AND HE DID IT
WITH ADMIRABLE GRACE SAYING THAT THE LIBERAL PARTY " HAD
ENTERED A NEW ERA", t THERE IS CERTAINLY A FAIR AMOUNT OF
AMBIGUITY IN THAT MR GORTON OBVIOUSLY AGREES THAT IT IS
A NEW ERA FOR THE LIBERAL PARTY AND IT IS ONE'IN WHICH HE
DOES NOT WANT TO TAKE PART, WHATEVER IT MEANS FOR WHAT IS
LEFT OF THE LIBERAL PARTY, IT DOES MEAN FOR THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT AND THE LABOR PARTY AT ALL LEVELS, A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY TO GET ON WITH THE JOB FOR WHICH WE HAVE BEEN
TWICE ELECTED, TO GET ON WITH THE BUSINESS OF IMPLEMENTING
THE PROGRAM WHICH THE PEOPLE HAVE TWICE ENDORSED AND TO
CONTINUE THE JOB OF DEVELOPING FURTHER POLICIES TO ENSURE
YET ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR OUR CAUSE AT THE NEXT ELECTIONSV 



SPEECH BY THE PRJN'E MINISTER, E. G. WHIT1LJ1, M.
TO THE APEX CONVENT1iOWI ALURY
FRIDAY, 1VLARCH 2 1975
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION A NEW PARTNERSHIP
THE BASIC CONTRACT BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WAS SPELT OUT IN THE POLICY
SPEECH WHICH I DELIVERED ON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTY FOR THE ELECTIONS OF i972. IN THAT SPEECH I SAID:-
" OUR PROGRAM HAS THREE GREAT AIMS. THEY ARE:
To PROMOTE EQUALITY;
To INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN
THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR' LAND;
AND TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE
HORIZONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE".
THE INTERVENING TWO YEARS'AND FOUR MONTHS HAS
BEEN A PERIOD OF VERY GREAT TURBULENCE AND TURMOIL AT HOME
AND AROUND THE WORLD. GOVERNMENTS EVERYWHERE HAVE HAD TO
DEAL WITH PROBLEMS OF RAPID CHANGE NOT EXPERIENCED IN THE
LIFETIME OF THE OLDEST OF US HERE, IN ALL THE MIXED ECOr" OMIES1
THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM IS UNDERGOING UNEXAMPLED STRESS. IN ALL
THE DEMOCRACIES, THE POLITICAL SYSTEMS ARE UNDER PROFOUND
CHALLENGE. GOVERNMENTS, BUSINESSe ORGANISATIONS, GROUPS,
FAMILIES, INDIVIDUALS ARE BEING CALLED UPON TO ADJUST AND
ADAPT TO CHANGE AT A PACE AND TO A DEGREE SELDOM, IF EVER,
ENCOUNTERED IN H-ISTORY. s12 
IN THESE CIRCUMSTANCES IT MIGHT APPEAR THAT PRINCIPLES
PROCLAIMED FOR THE PURPOSES OF AN ELECTION MORE THAN
TWO YEARS AGO WOULD HAVE LITTLE RELEVANCE TODAY. THERE MAY
BE THOSE WHO BELIEVE THAT THE SHEER NUM", BER OF DECISIONS WHICH
HAVE HAD TO BE MADE, THE SPEED WITH WHICH THEY HAVE HAD TO
BE MADE HAVE OBSCURED OR EVEN OVER-RIDDEN BASIC PRINCIPLES,
IDO BELIEVE, HOWEVER. THAT IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE YEARSO
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE SEEN TO HAVE PROMOTED THE
THREE BASIC PRINCIPLES I PUT FORWARD IN 1972,. THE PRINCIPLES
WHICH ARE THE BASIS OF OUR CONTRACT WITH THE PEOPLE, WITH
FIDELITY AND CONSISTENCY.
AT THIS APEX CONVENTION, IT IS THOROUGHLY
APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD TRY TO PUT THE POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE PERSPECTIVE'OF
THE SECOND AIM WHICH I ASSERTED IN 1972 TO INVOLVE THE
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF
OUR NATION. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD DO SO BEFORE AN
AUDIENCE OF APEXIANS, MEMBERS OF THE MOST CONCERNED, THE
MOST INVOLVED OF ALL OUR COMMUNITY SERVICE ORGANISATIONS.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT I SHOULD DO SO IN THIS CITY, WHERE
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN ONE OF THE HIGHEST TASKS THAT
CIVILISED MAN-CAN UNDERTAKE THE CREATION OF A GREAT CITYWILL
BE CRUCIAL IN DETERMINING THE SUCCESS OR FAILURE OF A
NOBLE EXPERIMENT. me J3 
3
THE PROGRAI-UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF INVOLVEMENT BY THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS. HOSPITALS, iWELFARE AND
CITIES THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN ACCEPTED IN AUSTRALIA, THE
UN4DERLYING PHILOSOPHY IS THIS: IN MODERN COMMUNITIES, EVEN
THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNO0T PROVIDE ITS MEMBERS WITH THE
BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST MEDICAL TREATMENT, THE BEST
ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE COMMUNITY. INCREASINGLY, THE
BASIC SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES WHICH DETERMINE THE REAL
STANDARD OF LIFE OF A FAMILY OR AN INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE
PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY AND ONLY TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH
THE COMMUNITY IS WILLINIG TO PROVIDE THEM. EITHER THE COMMUNITY
PROVIDES THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE* PROVIDED AT ALL. IN THE
AUSTRALIAN CONT EXT, THIS MEANS THAT THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, MUST FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT
BE FINANCED AT ALL. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED
THAT THESE SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES WILL BE PROVIDED AND
THAT THEY WILL BE FINANCED. AND A NATIONAL FINANCIAL
COMMITMENT MUST INEVITABLY MEAN A NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT.
BOTH BEFORE AND SINCE WE CAME TO OFFICE, THIS
APPROACH THIS NATIONAL INVOLVEMENT HAS BEEN CRITICISED
ON A NUMBER OF GROUNDS, I'D LIKE TO DEAL WITH TWO OF THE
CRITICISMS. ONE IS THE CHARGE OF CENTRALISM. THE OTHER IS
THE FEAR THAT A BLOATED BUREAUCRACY BUREAUCRACIES ARE OF
COURSE ALWAYS BLOATED -THE FEAR THAT UNFEELING PUBLIC
SERVANTS IN CANBERRA -AND PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CANBERRA ARE
ALWAYS UNFEELING WILL DESTROY COMMUNITY INITIATIVE, &amp; a 
COMMUNI-TY INVOLVEMENT, EITHER BY MAKING VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
LIKE APEX REDUNDANT OR BY THROTTLiING THEM WITH RED
TAPE. IMAINTAIN, ON THE CONTRARY, THESE TWO PROPOSITIONS:-
FIRST, THAT OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMS WILL
REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM WITH GENUINE REGIONAL
INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION;
AND SECONDLY, THAT THE PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR, OR
RATHER, POSITIVELY, REQUIRE A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND
INITIATIVE BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE COMMUNITY WHICH
MAKES THE WORK OF VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS LIKE APEX MORE
RELEVANT, MORE REWARDING, MORE EFFECTIVE, MORE EXCITING,
THAN EVER BEFORE. LATER, I SHALL REFER TO SOME SPECIFIC PROGRAMS
IN WELFARE, HEALTH, EDUCATION AND AREA IMPROVEMENT WHERE
WE SEEK AND NEED PARTICIPATION BY AND COOPERATION WITH
COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS, PROGRAMS IN WHICH APEX IS ALREADY
INVOLVED. I SHOULD SAY, HOWEVER, THAT OUR WISH FOR COMMUNITY
INVOLVEMENT IS BEING PUT-INTO EFFECT OVER A VERY WIDE RANGE
OF POLICY MAKING AND DECISION TAKING. a 
THE NUMEROUS ROYAL COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES OF INQUIRY
AND TASK FORCES WE HAVE ESTABLISHED ARE NOT ONLY DESIGNED TO
PROVIDE THE BEST ADVICE FROM THE BEST QUALIFIED MEN AND WOMEN.
THEY HAVE ALSO DEIMONSTRATED OUR INTENTION TO HAVE IFULL PUBLIC
INQUIRY AND FREE PUBLIC DEBATE BEFORE FAR-REACHING DECISIONS
ARE TAKEN. THERE IS NO BETTER ILLUSTRATION THAN THE ROYAL
COMISSION ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION ITSELF.
HERE WE ARE TRYING TO GET TO THE VERY HEART OF THE MATTERTHE
FUNDAMENTAL RELATION4S BETWEEN THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND
THE GENERAL COMMUNITY.
SHORTL&gt; AFTER ITS ESTABLISHMENT, THE COMMISSION
INVITED INTERESTED ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS TO MAKE
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS TO IT ON MATTERS RELATING TO THE TERMS
OF REFERENCE. THE COMMISSION'WROTE TO MORE THAN 150 GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES AND 500 ORGANISATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, BUSINESS GROUPS, CHURCHES, VOLUNTARY SERVICE
ORGANISATIONS, EMPLOYER AND EMPLOYEE ASSOCIATIONS, AND PROFESSIONAL
AND WELFARE BODIES, TO INFORM THEM OF THE TERMS OF
REFERENCE AND SEEKING THEIR COMMENTS.
W4ITH THE AID OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF SOCIAL
SERVICE, H ELP AND ENCOURAGEMENT WAS GIVEN TO LESS ARTICULATE
AND LESS WELL-ORGANISED CITIZENS TO PREPARE SUBMISSIONS. THE
ROYAL COMMISSION's ADVISER ON COMMUNITY RELATIONS AND HIS
STAFF ASSISTED AND SOLICITED MANY SUCH SUBMISSIONS TO
GENERATE AS WIDE A HEARING OF PUBLIC VIEWS AS POSSIBLE. 111/ 6 
AT EACH PLACE WHERE A FORM-' AL HEARING WAS HELD, PUBLIC MEETINGS
WERE ARRANJGED FOR INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANISATIONS TO
PUT FORWARD EITHER ORAL OR WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS, SIX HUNDRED
PEOPLE TOOK PART IN THESE MEETINGS.
THIS HAS BEEN AN EXAMPLE-0F COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
IN A MATTER OF FUNDAMENTAL IMPORTANCE AT A LEVEL QUITE NEW
To AUSTRALIA. 14E HAVE ADOPTED THE SAME APPROACH WITH THE WORKING
GROUP ON RURAL POLICY WHICH PRODUCED THE GREEN PAPER ON
RURAL POLICY, WITH THE INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION, AND
WITH [ NVIRONMENTAL-IMPACT STATEMENTS, I! E HAVE TAKEN THE
VIEW THAT PUBLIC PARTICIPATION BY THE GOVERNED IS A FUNDAMENTAL
CHARACTERISTIC OF DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT, INITIALLY
AND INEVITABLY, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION WILL MEAN THAT THE
BEST ORGANISED AND THE MOST ARTICULATE. THE MOST ACTIVE WILL
TEND TO HAVE THE FIRST AND GREATEST SAY. WE DO WISH HOWEVER,
TO* PROVIDE THE MACHINERY A14D TO DEVELOP A LEVEL OF PUBLIC
AWARENESS WHICH WILL ENABLE THE WHOLE PUBLIC TO BE INVOLVED
AND INCLUDED IN A GENUINE, MEANINGFUL WAY.
THESE ARE EXAMPLES OF PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT iN DISCUSSING AND FORMING POLICY. W4E
WANT HOWEVER, PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
IN IMPLEMENTING POLICY. WHE WANT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
THROUGH COMMUNITY ACTION, LET ME GIVE EXAMPLES OF HOW WE
ARE TRYING TO ACHIEVE THIS IN THE FIELDS OF SOCIAL WELFARE,
CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION, HEALTH AND THE ENHANCEMENT OF THE
PLACES WE LIVE IN. 
THE AUSTRALIAN Ass ISTANCE PLAN
THE AUS T R tL I Ass ISTANCE PLAN IS A PIONEERING
EXPERI'" IENT IN COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE
IS TO SEEK OUT AND MEET AREAS OF SOCIAL N4EED HITHERTO EITHER
IGNORED OR UNIDENTIFIED BY . THE-EXISTING WELFARE AGENCIESNATIONAL,
STATE, LOCAL OR VOLUNTARY. ITS ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTIC
IS THAT ITS WORK IS BASED ON REGIONS, ON REGIONAL
COMMUNITIES AND THAT ITS WORK AND PLANNING IS TO BE DONE
BY GENUINELY INDEPENDENT, GENUINELY COMMUNITY BASED GROUPS
OF CONCERNED CITIZENS WHO KNOW THE SPECIAL NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY OF WHICH THEY ARE A PART.
THE 9ASIC PLANNING UNIT IS CALLED THE REGIONAL
COUNCIL FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPM~ ENT. SUCH COUNCILS HAVE ALREADY
BEEN SET UP IN THIRTY-SIX REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. THE
COUNCILS ACT AS A COMMUNITY FORUM FOR DISCUSSION AND A
COMMUNITY INSTRUMENT FOR ACTION IN IMPROVING EXISTING WELFARE
SERVICES AND PERHAPS MORE IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN, EXPERIMENTING
IN NEW FORMS OF WELFARE. As ITS CONTRIBUTION, THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT: . VM AKES SPECIFIC GRANTS TO TH E REGIONAL COUNCILS
TO COVER ADMINISTRATION;
aPROVIDES A ' CAPITATION GRANT'I OF $ 2 FOR EACH
PERSON4 IN THE REGION FOR SMALL SCALE, SHORTTERM
SOCIAL WELFARE PROJECTS;
aAND MAKES A ' COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT' GRANT TO
PAY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS TO STIMULATE
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. 
ANJINITIATING .1 GRANT IS AVAILABLE TO ASSIST THE FORMATION
OF A COU1NCIL WITH DIVERSE REPRESENTATION FROM COMMUNITY
ORGANISATION. THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSIONYOU WILl-BL AWARE THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GoVER1NMENT
HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION, IN THE
OPERATION OF THIS BODY, WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE PRINCIPLE
OF INVOLVING THE COMMUNITY AS CLOSELY AS POSSIBLE IN THE
PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT OF PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY THE
COMM ISS ION. a THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL PROVIDE HELP FOR
A WIDE RANGE OF IMAGINATIVE AND FLEXIBLE PROGRAMS DEVOTED
TO LOOKING AFTER CHILDREN BEFORE THEY REACH SCHOOL AGE AND
CARING FOR OLDER CHILDREN OUTSIDE SCHOOL HOURS,
THE DECISION TO SET UP A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION
WAS ITSELF A RESPONSE TO COMMUNITY REPRESENTATIONS FOR
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN PROVIDING CARE FOR CHILDREN. IT
RECOGNISES THAT THE CARE PROVIDED SHOULD NOT BE RIGID OR
HIGHLY INSTITUTIONALISED,~ BUT THAT CHOICES FOR PARENTS AND
THEIR CHILDREN SHOULD BE MAXIMISED: a a / 9 
THE POLICY OF THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WHEN IT
1 L LI.; ANND, U TIHF INTlR IMN COMMf. ITTI:! vWlH ICH IS NOW
CARRYING OUT ITS WORKK, I; ONE OF MAIllTAINING THE CLOSEST
POCSS lLE CONTACT WITH THll: COMMUNITY.
THE INTERIM COMMITTEE AND ITS VARIOUS STATE
COMMITTEES HAVE ALREADY RECEIVED A NUMBER OF REQUESTS FOR
ASSISTANCE FROM COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS AND WILL BE ENCOURAGING
MORE IN THE COMING FINANCIAL YEAR.
PART OF THE FINANCE TO BE ALLOCATED BY THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL GO TO THE STATES FOR SPECIFIC
PURPOSE GRANTS, AND PART OF THE FINANCE WILL GO DIRECT TO
COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS. BUT THE COMMISSION WILL EXPECT
THAT PROGRAMS TO BE SUPPORTED WILL BE THOSE WHICH THE
COMMUNITY HAS SHOWN IT WANTS, NOT JUST THOSE WHICH IT HAS
BEEN TOLD IT WANTS, AND THAT ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE RUNNING
OF THE PROGRAMS WILL ALLOW FOR A GENUINE COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. 
SCHOOLS COMMIIISSIONJ THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERqNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE
7.2 MILLION DOLLARS FOR THE 1977-75 TRIENINIUiM TO SUPPORT
INNOVATORY PROJECTS A: iD FIELD-13ASED EXPERIMENTS ASSOCIATED
WITH PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION. THE INNOVATIONS
PROGRAM WAS ESTAB. ILS iHD TO ACCEPT PROPOSALS FROM SCHOOLS,
TEACHERS, PARETNS, OR COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS.
THE INNOVATIONS PROGRAM kRPRIESENTS A MAJOR
EFFORT TO BRING ABOUT IMPROVEMENTS IN OUR EDUCATIONAL
SYSTEM THROUGH THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY INITIATIVE
AND THE DEVOLUTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FROM THE CENTRE TO
THE REGION. THE GENERAL AIMS OF THE PROGRAM ARE:
To IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF SCHOOLING IN AUSTRALIA;
TO ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY;
TO STIMULATE INNOVATION IN SCHOOLS;
To ENHANCE THE CAPACITIES OF ALL THOSE
COMMITTED TO EDUCATION TO GENERATE
THEIR OWN IMPROVEMENTS IN SCHOOLS. ./ 11 
1.1.
COMMUNITY IHEALITH iOGiAii
THE COiMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM IS AIMED AT THE
PROVISION OF SERVICES IN THE COMMUNITY WHERE PEOPLE LIVE
OR WORK AS DISTINCT FROM THOSE AVAIL.. ABLE IN HOSPITALS AND
SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS. COMMUNIIT. IY I-IALTH SERVICES HELP
PiRSONS -TO MEEl TIiE I HEALTH AND WELFI. ARE NEEDS AT CONVENIENT
LOCATIONS AND 0O REiTURN H1 ME AFTER ATTENDANCES, THIS
LESSENS DEPENDENCE N0 INS IITUTI ONSI AND FREQUENTLY PRESENTS
AN ALTERNATIVE TO GOING INTO HOSPITAL.
PEOPLE INVOLVED IN DECISION-MAKING ON THEIR LOCAL
HEALTH SERVICE WILL BE GIVEN OPPORTUNITIES TO INFLUENCE THE
ACCEPTABILITY AND AVAILABILITY OF SERVICES. IT WILL ALSO
PROVIDE A MEANS OF EDUCATING THE COMMUNITY AND CHANGING
CONVENTIONAL EXPECTATIONS. PEOPLE PARTICIPATING IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF THEIR OWN HEALTH SERVICES WILL HAVE A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF THE LIMITATIONS OF MEDICINE, THE COSTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF PARTICULAR SERVICES, AND THE INDIVIDUAL'S
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONAL AND FAMILY HEALTH. ./ 12 
AREA IlMPROVEMENT PROGRAiIS
T-HE AREi. A Ii'ifVEkLMENT PjROGRAM IS INTENDED TO
SUBSTANTIALLY IMI'iOV i LEi EQ UALITY O1: LIFE IN NOMINATED
REGIONS THROUGH PROJLCTS DETERMINED BY THE PEOPLE OF
THE REGION. A FUNDAMEI'TAL CONCEPT IN THE AIP IS THE
ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN MAKING
DECISIONS THAT AFFECT THEIR REGION . AND THEIR WAY OF
LIFE, THE AlP HAS BEEN AN EXERCISE IN CO-OPERATIVE
FEDERALISM WIYH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BEING
INVOLVED CLOSELY IN ALL ASPECTS OF THE PROGRAM, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING $ 14.1 MILLION IN
1974-75 FOR AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS, / 13 
13
iREGIONAL ELi'OYlM. T DViLOPiiT SCiEM-i
I GIVE A FIiNAL iXAIMPLE OF A COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
IN NATIONAL PROGRAMS ONE IN wiLIC APEX'HAS GIVEN
NOTAbLE COOPERATION. lUNDLlTilH E RGIONJAL EMPLOYMENT
DEVELOPMENT SCHL'EME, APEX CLUBS iTHROUGHiOUT AUSTRALIA HAVE
SS'PONSORIE) A NUMBER OF PIROJIECI WiHICH HAVE A DOUBL VALUE.
THEY PROVIDE SOCIALLY MEANI INGFUL WORK FOR THE IMMEDIAT
VICTIMS OF OUR PRESENT ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES AND THEY
LEAVE BEHIND SOMETHINIG OF ENDURING WORTH TO THE COMMUNITY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WELCOMES ANY APPLICATION FROM
APEX CLUBS FOR APPROVAL FOR PROJLCTS WHICH WOULD HAVE A
LASTING BENEFIT FOR THE COMMUNITY WHILE AT THE SAME TIME
GIVING MEN AND WOMEN PRESENTLY UNEMPLOYED SATISFYING,
WORTHWHILE WORK. THE WHOLE THRUST OF ALL THESE PROGRAMS
AND I COULD MENTION MANY MORE IS THAT A GREAT NUMBER OF
CONCERNED AUSTRALIAN MEN AND WOMEN ARE ALREADY INVOLVED
IN COMMUNITY DECISION-MAKING AND COMMUNITY ACTION IN
COOPERATION WITH GOVERNMENT, IN A WAY THAT WAS NEVER
THOUGHT POSSIBLE A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO. IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT WE AS A GOVERNMENT SHOULD PROVIDE MORE AND MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS, PARTICULARLY THE
DISADVANTAGED AND THE HANDICAPPED IN OUR MIDST. . ll^ 
BUT IT I " s EQUALLY I MPORTANT IN TERMS OF
THE STRENGTH AND VIGOUR OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY THAT
THOSE OF US WHO ARiL NOT UNDERIPRIVILEGED, NOT HANDICAPPED,
THOSE OF US WHO BY VIRTUE. OF WEALTH OR HEALTH OR GOOD
FORTUNE CAN SERVE, SHOULD HAVE ENHANCED OPPORTUNITIES
TO SERVE THE COMMUNITY, SO WE ARE TRYING IN TRUTH
BOTH TO ENHANCE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE DISA) VANTAGED AND
IN A JIFFERENT BUT RELATED SENSE THE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THE ADVANTAGED OPPORTUNITIES TO SERVE THE COMMUNITY,
I SHOULD HOWEVER, ADD A WARNING. ALL THESE
PROGRAMS I HAVE MENTIONED ARE NOVEL FOR AUSTRALIA AND
EXPERIMENTAL IN AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE THEY ARE NEW,
BECAUSE THEY ARE TENTATIVE, THEY LACK THE POLITICAL
CLOUT THAT COMES FROM YEARS AND YEARS OF EXPERIENCE AND
EXPERTISE BECAUSE THEY SEEK OUT NEW AND NEGLECTED
AREAS OF NEED, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS POLITICALLY
PERIPHERAL. THEY HAVE NOT HAD THE TIME TO BECOME
SACRED COWS. BECAUSE THEY ARE DESIGNED TO SERVE THE
NEEDS OF THE WEAKEST, OF THE LEAST ARTICULATE MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS POLITICALLY
DISPENSABLE. 
l O F Hi : G i I lI/ E I I Oi I D
T IL-rFFAI. Ai i AC; [) ILAN Ar) iWc OllNAL iPI. OYIMIHT
EVIJEOIP ; i-NT S CIIE-I'L A iR A IR ADY IIiE'R C IAI. dGE FROM
SUM E OF HiE o AAIl l UVI. G IML. I'JS IN I il-IGH COUI( T
NOT, OF CGURSEL ON ANY GRIOU. WDS OF TfI-IR SOCIAL VALUE
BUT ON lH E cCiOl-NSTITUTINAt. ARGUMi'lT THAT THEY SHOULD
BE PROVIDED, IF AT ALL, iY OR TI-IHOU THE STATE GOVERNMI
' TS. 1, . ANmD IF THAT CilALLENE SII:) ILD SUCCEIED, NO LESS THAN
7 NATIOHNAL WELFARF PROGRAMS, SiE FJ: THEM INITIATEDI) BY
THE PREVIOUS,. GOVCRNMENT, COULD BE I'iPERILLED. FOR
EXAMPLE, PROGRAMS FOR AGED AND HOMELESS AND HANDICAPPED
AND ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, ISOLATED CHILDREN, HEALTH CENTRES,
LEGAL AID OFFICES, NURSING HOMES AND HOME NURSING,
MEALS ON WHEELS, FLYING DOCTORS AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION.
THE COMMON DISTINGUISHING FACTOR IN ALL THESE PROGRAMS
IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS OF THE
WEAK AND INARTICULATE SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY THE
OLD THE SICK, MIGRANTS, ABORIGINES, THE VERY YOUNG. IF
THESE GROUPS WERE POLITICALLY POWERFUL, IF THEY COULD
MOUNT EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PRESSURE, THE GOVERNMENTS
WHICH DARED TO PLACE THESE PROGRAM IN JEOPARD'Y WOULD
BE DESTROYED. BUT AS IT IS, THE THING PASSES OFF WITH
SCARCE A MURMUR, 
AGAIN, BECiU 3E THESE PROGiRAMS THE ONES I
HAVE NiENTIONED TODAY AS ', W'ELL AS THE ONES THREATENED
BY THE HIGH COURr CHALLEINGE CAN HELP ONLY THE WEAK,
TiiL UNDLI P/ I VI LEGTL THItL INARTI CUL. ATC, THEY WOULD BE
THE FIRST TO GO, TiIl FIR. ST TO BE K'NOCKED OFF IN ANY
FULL SCALE ONSLAUGHT AGAINST PUBLIC SPENDING AND PUBLIC
INIIATIVE. lllE TRAGLDY IS THAT WHATEVER VALUE THESE
PROGRAMS MIGHT HAVE FOR THOUSANDS UPON THOUSANDS OF
OUR FELLOW CITIZENS, WHATEVER THE COST IN HUMAN HAPPINESS
AND HUMAN HOPE THEIR ABOLITION MIGHT MEAN, IT WOULD BE
QUITE FEASIBLE POLITICALLY TO DUMP THEM ALL AT ALMOST
NO POLITICAL COST.
THE ONLY PROTECTION IS THE CONSCIENCE AND
THE CONCERN OF THE INTERESTED AND ARTICULATE GROUPS IN
THE COMMUNITY, OF WHICH I FIRMLY BELIEVE APEX IS IN THE
FRONT RANK. IT IS BECAUSE APEX HAS BEEN INVOLVED AND
. WILL BE FURTHER INVOLVED IN THESE SORTS OF COMMUNITY
PROJECTS, IT IS BECAUSE APEXIANS KNOW THEIR VALUE, KNOW
WHAT THEY MEAN TO THOUSANDS OF OUR FELLOW-CITIZENS, THAT
I BELIEVE I CAN COUNT UPON APEX TO PROTECT THEM AS WELL
AS TO PROMOTE THEM. A VOICE MUST BE RAISED ON BEHALF
OF THE VOICELESS IN OUR COMMUNITY AND I LOOK TO APEX
TO GIVE IT. s / 17 
17
ISA[ D iEEF3R f HAT WE, LIi K-ALL CCOhIPARABLE
COMNfIIITI ES, ARE-GO IN'G TiIRO\ UGi-i A PELRIOGD OF EXTRAORD INARY
ECO'OU11 C DIFFICULTIC'lL&amp; i ' INIFICAJ11Tl-Y, AnPEX WAS FORMED
IN A TIM E OF EVEN GREATLR HARDSHIP ANDil DIFFICULTY. * IT
WAS A RESPONSE BY A iiAf'JDFUL OF CONCERNELD AUSTRALIANS AT
THE TIMiE OF THE DEFRESSImJ. iHOUGH -hMERE IS A SII1LARITY
IN THE UNIVERSAI.. IT\( OF FRESENT WORLD ECONOMIC PROBLEMS,
THERE IS' ONE VEfY GNEi5AT SAL. UTARY DIFFi: RENCE. THE GREAT
DIFFERENCE BETWEN THEN AND NOW IS iiE DEGREE OF SOCIAL
CONCERN, THE EXTENT TO WH:-IICH THOSE IIN TROUBL. E ARE
SUPPORTED BY THE CO1NU1iINTY, BY A CObICERNED COMMUNITY,
BY TilE CONSCIENCE OF Ti! E COMMUNITY. YET THAT CONCERN
AND THAT CONSCIENCE CAN ALL TOO EASILY GO TO SLEEP.
I LOOK NOT LEAST TO APEX TO KEEP THAT CONSCIENCE AWAKE,
TO KEEP THAT CONCERN ALIVE, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE 17TH NATIONAL CONFERENCE
OF THE FEDERAL COUNCIL FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
ABORIGINES TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS
CANBERRA, FRIDAY 28 MARCH, 1975
It is taking a long time to redress the long history
of injustice to our Aboriginal people. In no field of
Government are good intentions more easily subverted by
practical difficulties and human failings. My Government
has done a great deal for your people, but I am not going
to pretend that the plight of Aborigines has been removed
or even greatly alleviated. It has not. If increased
Government expenditures, the passage of enlightened legislation
and the creation of new agencies were all that were
needed, Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders would now
be enjoying much happier prospects for a full and better
life. The truth is that we.-are dealing with perverse and
intractable things like human nature, deeply ingrained
cultural and social habits, the legacy of decades of neglect
and generations of repression. In recent weeks in parts of
the Northern Territory we have seen a depressing and lamentable
resurgence of the worst strains of prejudice and racism.
Your struggle, our struggle, will be long and difficult. I
can only say this : throughout that struggle the Australian
Labor Government will be on your side.
And for all the difficulties we face the important
thing is not to lose faith in the power of Governments to
bring about change and improvement. True enough, the road
is hard and full of obstacles but when a national Government
is behind you there is hope, and there are real gains.
We should never forget the resounding victory Aboriginal
people secured in the referendum of 1967. That result gave
the Australian Government concurrent powers with the States,
and where necessary overriding powers, in respect of Aborigines
and Torres Strait Islanders. It was an unmistakable affirmation
of the people's will. And it was if you will forgive
the phrase -' very much a victory for centralism. We might
well ponder what the result of such a referendum would be
today. Would the Opposition senators and the States resist
such a referendum in their current obsession with State
rights? Would the referendum be carried so decisively?
The lesson to keep in mind is that reforms of this kindreforms
so crucial to your welfare and crucial to Australia's
reputation can easily be frustrated or set aside even when
the people approve them. 
Of course none of us can be content with the progress
of Aboriginal welfare since the referendum was carried. At
least one State is still resisting the clear instruction
given by that result, just as they resisted the efforts of
our predecessors to give effect to the people's verdict.
It is easily forgotten that Queenslanders themselves voted
over'ihelmingly for the referendum. Yet discriminatory laws
remain on the statute book in Queensland. Mr. Gorton did
his best to remove them. The State Government defied him.
And of course they have defied my own Government's attempts.
In November 1973 we first brought in a bill to outlaw all
forms of racial discrimination; it is still before the
Parliament. Our Human Rights Bill had a similar objective
and has met with similar obstruction. Last year we introduced
a further bill to override specific discriminatory
Queensland laws by legislation in the national Parliament.
I find it intolerable that Queensland's discriminatory laws
remain in force eight years after the referendum was passed,
in the face of the people's wishes, in the face of the
expressed policy of the two major political parties in
Australia. I would not want you. to think that we see Aboriginal
affairs as solely a national Government responsibility.
Your own council is organised on federal lines and our
approach requires a good measure of co-operation with the
States. Wh ere the States have constitutional authority in
such matters as health and education, we have sought the
co-operation of State Ministers and their departments.
So what we are doing is enabling Aboriginal communities
and groups to meet their own needs and look after
themselves. This year we are spending $ 13 million to fund
Aboriginal Housing Associations so they can build and buy
houses. We are funding Aboriginal medical services in New
South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia.
Aboriginal legal services have been established in all
States and the Northern Territory. We have set up the
Aboriginal Loans Commission to provide loans to Aboriginals
for business enterprises, and have prepared legislation to
make it easier for Aboriginal communities and groups to
incorporate for economic and social purposes.
One of the Government's major reforms was to set
up the National Aboriginal Consultative Committee, a
national body to which Aborigines may elect representatives
to advise the minister on policies and programs. We want
the committee to promote the autonomy and independence of
the Aboriginal people and help them maintain distinctive
cultures. 
For the same reason we established an Aboriginal Arts
Board within the Australia Council, and it is generously funded
to encourage traditional and developing Aboriginal arts. We
have introduced bilingual education courses in Northern Australia
so that Aboriginal children can be taught in their own dialects.
The Government has recognised from the start that land
rights are central to your aspirations, your dignity and your
place in a just social order. One of the Government's first
actions in December 1972 was to freeze mineral exploration
and land leasing in Northern Territory reserves and appoint
a Royal Commission to advise on ways in which Aboriginal land
rights might best be recognised. After Mr. Justice Woodward's
first report in July 1973, two regional Land Councils were set
up and, largely on the basis of submissions from these Councils,
a final report and recommendations were submitted in May 1974.
The recommendations were accepted in principle by Government.
Legislation is being drafted for introduction in the present
session after further consultations with the Land Councils.
The Aboriginal Land Fund Act was introduced and passed
later in 1974. It establishes a fund for the purchase by
Aboriginal communities of land for economic and social purposes
and for a Commission to administer the Fund. At least two of
the five members of the Commission will be Aboriginal. A
number of large properties have been bought by Aboriginal
communities since 1972 on the basis of funds provided by grant
by the Government.
Arrangements are being made for the surrender fhis year
of over 1,200 square miles from Wave Hill Station for theA
Gurindji community at Wattie Creek in terms of the group's
original request in 1967 so that the Gurindji can raise cattle
on their own land.
On top of that we have provided vastly greater sums
for Aboriginal housing, health, education and employment.
Here's a comparison to bear in mind. In 1971-72 the last
full year of Liberal-Country Party Government, Commonwealth
spending on Aboriginal affairs amounted to 32 million.
This financial year we are spending $ 164 million. But don't
imagine that because-of this we are ignorant of the problems
still facing you. The very generosity of our grants has
brought difficulties of fu nding and accounting for many of
your people. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has
redeployed its staff to cope with the pressure of demand.
We know, too, that rural areas, where many Aborigines live,
have been hard hit by unemployment and there are special
problems of employment for Aborigines in more remote areas.
All this, regrettably, puts abnormal strains on relationships
with white communities. 
4.
I hope your own council will help remove these
sources of tension. Despite the establishment of other
Aboriginal bodies there will always be a need for your
organisation in promoting understanding of Aboriginal needs
and putting forward sound, practical and enlightened policies.
You have campaigned with us on many fundemantal
issues the 1967 referendum, the removal of discriminatory
legislation, land rights for your people. Those battles
are mainly won. You can be sure of our continued support
as we move towards the achievement of our other goals.
Don't be disappointed by inevitable setbacks and delays,
by administrative difficulties, by the problems posed by
your new responsibilities and your new sense of independence.
We are working steadily, patiently and surely towards a better
way of life for the Aboriginal people. In Jim Cavanagh we
have a minister with great common sense and great humanity.
He is tackling practical problems without losing sight of
ideals. There will always be groups with a vested interest
in obstruction and mischief. There will always be those,
in both the Aboriginal and white communities, with a vested
interest in tension, confrontation, even violence. It is
important to resist them, to get on with the job in our own
way, to keep clear and practical goals before us, to be on
guard against bombast and hysteria. I ask the Aboriginal
people to put their faith in a Government with their true
interests at heart, and ultimately to have faith in yourselves. 



GROWTH CENTRES IN QUEENSLAND
It is unfortunate f or the people of Queensland,
and particularly for those of Townsville who would be the
first to benefit, that the Queensland Premier is more
interested in making political points than in receiving
financial assistance from the Australian Government.
His ill-informed comments on growth centres contrast
starkly with the attitude of Liberal Premiers in New
South Wales and Victoria who have welcomed the Australian
Government's initiatives and cooperated with them.
The principles involved have been approved by the
Governments of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia
and are in the process of being implemented in Albury/ Wodonga,
Bathurst/ Orange, the South-West sector of Sydney and Monarto.
The basic principle agreed is that people should be
able to build their homes on their own land and hold this land
in freehold tenure for all time. The only condition that has
been placed on residential freehold is that land owners should
not be able to make private profit out of public decisions
such as a change in land use zoning.
At no time has the Australian Government considered
any proposal that all homes built in growth centres should be
for rental. In all growth centres supported by the Australian
Government people will have full opportunity to buy houses of
their own choice. The Australian Government and all State Governments with
whom agreements have been negotiated want to see viable growth
centres that do not have to rely for their establishment and
continued growth on subsidies. The objective of the Australian
Government has been to provide special financial support in the
early stages of growth and provide, where necessary, facilities
in advance of the normal time by which they would be needed. For
all revenue producing investment a basic principle of repayable.
loans has been established. For the growth centres agreed with
State Governments, long term loans are being provided at the
long term loan rate with initial grace periods. But agreements
have been reached with State Governments on the provision of nonrepayable
grants for certain purposes. For example, in the case
of sewerage backlog the assistance provided by the Australian
Government has been one-third grant and the remainder long-term
loans. Grants on a two for one matchihg basis are being made
available for the purchase of non-urban land. Assistance will
also be provided for projects to a standard higher than they
would have been provided for an equivalent population in other
areas in a State. The aim is to develop attractive well-planned
growth centres. / 2 
A detailed evaluation of proposals for international
airport facilities at Townsville is being undertaken currently
by the Bureau of Transport Economics. A report is expected
to be available at the end of next month. It is important,
of course, that any major proposals such as this for Townsville
be effectively integrated with other major projects and programs
to cater for future growth.
Accelerated growth in Townsville could be successfully
achieved if an agreement were reached between the Australian
Government and the State Government on the basic objectives of
a program and the basic principles to underly that program.
The Australian Government wants to see a more rational distribution
of population, improved access of people to the range of
specialised services which can only be made available in large
centres and the access of people to cheap developed land.
The Australian Government has promised to help promote
that growth. Its programs however need the cooperation of
the Queensland Government if they are to be fully realised.
Townsville, Qld.
April 5, 1975 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME INIISTER
FOR THE OPENING OF THE EXHIBITION.*
MODERN MASTERS: MANET TO MATISSE.
AT THE ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.-
SYDNEY,. 9 APRIL 1975
THIS IS PROBABLY THE MOST IMPORTANT ART EXHIBITION
EVER TO COME To AUSTRALIA. AUSTRALIANS FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
TRAVEL HAVE PERHAPSSEEN SOME OF THE WORKS, OR THEIR LIKE,. IN THE
GREAT GALLERIES OF NORTH AMERICA AND EUROPE; OTHERS MAY HAVE
SEEN THEM REPRODUCED IN ART BOOKS; BUT THIS IS THE FIRST
OPPORTUNITY THAT THE LARGE PROPORTION OF AUSTRALIANS HAS HAD
TO ENJOY AND SAVOUR THE REAL THING,
CEZANNE. BONNARD,, BRAQUE,. DALI. DUBUFFET.
GAUGUIN,. VAN GOGH,. KLEE AND OTHERS VIE WITH EACH OTHER FOR
PRIDE OF PLACE; AND MANET. MATISSE,. MODIGLIANI. MUNCH,. PICASSO
AND MANY OTHERS VIRTUALLY STUMBLE OVER EACH OTHER TO CLAIM OUR
ATTENTIONt IT WOULD BE AN INVIDIOUS TASK TO TRY TO SINGLE OUT
INDIVIDUAL ARTISTS OR WORKS FOR SPECIAL COMMENT ALL HAVE THEIR
IMPORTANCE AND WE MUST BE THANKFUL TO THOSE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
EXHIBITION FOR BRINGING THIS VISUAL FEAST TO OUR COUNTRY. m e1 / 2 
-2-
THERE ARE, I BELIEVE, MORE THAN 100 WORKS IN THE
EXHIBITION REPRESENTING THE FINEST IN EUROPEAN ART OVER THE LAST
HALF OF THE 19TH CENTURY AND THE FIRST HALF OF THE 2OTH CENTURY.
THE ROLE OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, NEW YORK, IN PUTTING THE
EXHIBITION TOGETHER HAS BEEN CRUCIAL, AND I THINK IT IS IMPORTANT
TO REMEMBER THAT THIS IS NOT THE FIRST TIME THAT THE MUSEUM HAS
BEEN RESPONSIBLE FOR BRINGING SIGNIFICANT ART EXHIBITIONS TO
AUSTRALIA. OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS 3 EXHIBITIONS HAVE TOURED
AUSTRALIAN GALLERIES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE MUSEUM' S
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM.
TO THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART AND OTHER GALLERIES AND
THE PRIVATE COLLECTORS WHO LOANED WORKS FOR THIS EXHIBITIONI
EXTEND THE THANKS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, AND I TRUST THAT
THESE VALUABLE WORKS SO GENEROUSLY MADE AVAILABLE MAY NOT
SUFFER FOR BEING HUNG UPSIDE DOWN IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.
ART TODAY IS VERY MUCH AN INTERNATIONAL -OR SHOULD
ISAY A MULTINATIONAL VENTURE. GREAT EXHIBITIONS ARE OFTEN
SPONSORED BY PRIVATE COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS. THE ALCOA
FOUNDATION HAS GENEROUSLY CONTRIBUTED $ 150,000 TO THIS
EXHIBITION, AND I SOMETIMES WONDER WHERE MODERN ART WOULD BE
WITHOUT BEER CANS AND TOBACCO. .1s.@ 3 
-3-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS, OF COURSE, PLAYING ITS
PART, AS IT QUITE RIGHTLY SHOULD. FIRST, IT HAS INDEMNIFIED THE
OWNERS OF THE WORKS COMPRISING TH4E EXHIBITION AGAINST LOSS OR
DAMAGE TO A TOTAL AMOUNT OF $ US 70 MILLION. WITHOUT THIS
SUPPORT THE EXHIBITION WOULD VERY LIKELY HAVE NOT BEEN POSSIBLE
BECAUSE OF THE PROHIBITIVE COSTS OF NORMAL INSURANCE COVER.
I SHOULD ADD THAT THE TREASURER WHO IS UNABLE TO BE WITH US
TONIGHT HAS ASKED ME TO STRESS HIS KEEN INTEREST IN THE SAFETY
OF THE EXHIBITION. SECONDLY, AN IMPORTANT AND CONTINUING ROLE IS
BEING PLAYED BY THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD OF THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL.
WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS IS MEETING THE TRANSPORT COSTS OF
THE EXHIBITION. THERE IS STILL A LINGERING PREJUDICE AGAINST MODERN
ART IN ALL SOCIETIES. EXHIBITIONS OF GREAT ART WORKS WILL HELP
TO DISPEL THIS; AND IT IS THROUGH REFERENCE TO THE WORKS OF
THE FOUNDING FATHERS OF MODERN PAINTING THAT WE SHALL COME TO
A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IS HAPPENING IN ART AROUND US TODAY.
WHEN THE AUSTRALIAN NlATIONAL GALLERY BOUGHT JACKSON
POLLOCK'S BLUJE POLES IN 1973 THERE WAS CONSIDERABLE CRITICISM FROM
PEOPLE WHO KNEW LITTLE ABOUT MODERN PAINTING AND WANTED TO KNOW
EVEN LESS. I REGRET THAT SECTIONS ' OF THE MEDIA DID THEIR
BEST TO PROVOKE PHILISTINE REACTIONS TO THE PURCHASE, THERE IS
A CERTAIN IRONY, THEREFORE, THAT IT WAS A NEWSPAPER, THE MELBOURNE
" HERALD", THAT IN 1939 SPONSORED AN EXHIBITION OF 215 WORKS BY
MANY OF THE ARTISTS REPRESENTED HERE THIS EVENING. iI . iA 
IT WAS ONE OF THE FIRST MAJOR EXHIBITIONS OF MODERN
ART IN THIS COUNTRY, AND THERE WERE FURIOUS REACTIONS WHEREVER
IT WAS SHOWN, SUCH ATTITUDES PERSIST, BUT I BELIEVE THAT WE NOW
HAVE A BETTER PERSPECTIVE AND UNDERSTANDING OF THE PLACE OF MODERN
ART IN THE HISTORY OF OUR CULTURE,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS MAKING EARNEST EFFORTS TO
PROMOTE AN UNDERSTANDING AND LOVE OF THE ARTS TOWARDS IMPROVING THE
QUALITY OF LIFE OF OUR WHOLE COMMUNITY, OUR PRINCIPAL AGENCY IS
THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL, WHICH ' ASSISTS, THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE
OF ART AND IS CURRENTLY SPONSORING ( WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS) AN EXHIBITION IN EUROPE OF THE WORKS OF TEN AUSTRALIAN
PAINTERS AND SCULPTORS, THE VISUAL ARTS BOARD OF THE COUNCIL
HAS CONTRIBUTED SUBSTANTIALLY TO BRINGING THIS AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS
TO AUSTRALIA, IT MAKES GRANTS DIRECTLY TO ARTISTS; IT MAKES
SUBSIDIES TO BODIES FOR COMMISSIONING WORKS TO BE DISPLAYED IN
PUBLIC; IT MAKES SUBSIDIES TO PUBLIC GALLERIES FOR PURCHASING
AUSTRALIAN WORKS, AND GRANTS TO HELP ESTABLISH ARTISTS' WORKSHOPS
AND PUBLIC GALLERIES AND ASSIST ART SOCIETIES AND GROUPS, THE
BOARD'S BUDGET FOR 1974/ 75 EXCEEDS $ 1 MILLION, THIS IS PART
OF OUR OVERALL BUDGET FOR THE ARTS OF $ 20 MILLION THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR, 
IN CANBERRA WE ARE BUILDING A NATIONAL GALLERY
THE ROLE OF WHICH WILL BE TO COMPLEMENT THE WORK OF THE AUSTRALIA
COUNCIL AND OTHER ENTERPRISES, THROUGH PROVIDING FOR ALL TO
ENJOY EXAMPLES OF THE BEST WORKS OF ART AVAILABLE FROM DIFFERENT
PERIODS AND DIFFERENT CULTURES HERE AND ABROAD. THE EMPHASIS
ALWAYS IS ON QUALITY. AUSTRALIA IS BY NO MEANS WITHOUT DISTINCTION IN
INTERNATIONAL ART. IRECALL MY PLEASURE 18 MONTHS AGO WHENI
HEARDOF JOHN ARMSTRONG'S IMPORTANT PRIZE AT THE BIENNALE IN SAO
PAULO. SHORTLY AFTERWARDS, AT THE SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, I OPENED
THE FIRST BIENNALE OF SYDNEY -AN EVENT WHICH I HOPE WILL COME
TO RANK AMONG THE BEST OF ITS KIND IN THE WORLD.
EXHIBITIONS SUCH AS THIS HELP OUR OWN ARTISTS AND
GIVE US THE OPPORTUNITY TO COMPARE THEIR WORK WITH THAT OF
THE GREAT ARTISTS FROM OTHER COUNTRIES AND OTHER PERIODS. THE
COMMUNITY OF SPIRIT, THE HUMANITY COMMON TO ALL ARTISTIC
CREATION, MAY BE FELT AND SHARED DIRECTLY. THE RESULT IS
AN ENRICHMENT OF OUR ARTISTIC EXPERIENCE AND HOPEFULLY A
STIMULATION OF THE ENERGIES AND PERCEPTIONS OF OUR ARTISTS.
IN THE LAST 2L1 HOURS I HAVE RECEIVED REPRESENTATIONS
FROM MANY DISTINGUISHED AUSTRALIAN ARTISTS, WRITERS AND OTHERS
SEEKING TO REMOVE GIFTS OF WORKS OF ART FROM THE PROVISIONS
OF THE INCOME TAX LAWS. I CAN WELL UNDERSTAND THAT MANY GREAT
PUBLIC ART COLLECTIONS HAVE DEPENDED ON PRIVATE BENEFACTORS.
I CAN ASSURE YOU THAT THIS QUESTION WILL RECEIVE THE EARNEST
CONSIDERATION OF THE GOVERNMENT, BUT IT IS NOT SOMETHING I CAN
PRONOUNCE UPON AT A MOMENT'IS NOTICE. I BELIEVE, HOWEVER, THAT
A GOVERNMENT WORKING TO BUILD UP THE FOUNDATIONS OF A GREAT 
-6
NATIONAL COLLECTION MUST LOOK AT WAYS OF ENCOURAGING GIFTS
FROM * PRIVATE OWNERS. I WISH THE EXHIBITION EVERY SUCCESS. IAM HONOURED
TO HAVE BEEN INVITED TO OPEN IT. IT WILL BE SHOWN IN SYDNEY
AND MIELBOURNE, AND SPECIAL GRANTS WILL BE MADE BY THE VISUAL
ARTS BOARD TO ENABLE STUDENTS FROM OTHER CITIES AND STATES TO
TRAVEL TO SYDNEY OR M'ELBOURNE TO SEE IT. I PAY TRIBUTE TO THE
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART; TO WILLIAM
LEIBERMAN, WHO SELECTED THE EXHIBITION AND IS LOOKING AFTER IT IN
AUSTRALIA; TO THE DIRECTOR OF THE MUSEUM OF fM'ODERN ART, MiR
OLDENBURG, AND HIS STAFF; TO THE GALLERIES AND INDIVIDUALS WHO
HAVE LENT THEIR WORKS; TO THE ALCOA FOUNDATION AND ALCOA OF
AUSTRALIA; TO THE ART GALLERY OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA; AND TO ALL WHO HAVEHELPED WITH
THE ASSEMBLING, TRANSPORT AND SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS.
FINALLY, I BELIEVE IT IS A MARK OF THE QUALITY
OF THE EXHIBITION WE HAVE HERE, THAT I UNDERSTAND IT IS TO BE
DISPLAYED AT THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART ON ITS RETURN TO NEW
YORK BEFORE THE WORKS ARE FINALLY DISPERSED ONCE AGAIN TO THEIR
OWNERS. 
ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THE PRIME MIINISTER FOR A DINNER
GIVEN BY ALCOA OF AUSTRALIA AT THE BENNELONG POINT
RESTAURANT, SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE 9 APRIL 1975
1. ALL OF US CAN TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THE EXHIBITION
OPENED THIS EVENING. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT THIS
MORE SELECT CELEBRATION SHOULD TAKE PLACE IN THE OPERA
HOUSE, THE MOST BEAUTIFUL BUILDING IN THIS CITY, A
BUILDING THAT SYMBOLISES ALL THAT IS MOST MODERN AND
VIGOROUS IN OUR ARTISTIC AND CULTURAL LIFE.
2. I MUST SAY IT'S A PLEASURE TO ATTEND A DINNER
GIVEN By ALCOA AND NOT BE EXPECTED TO TALK ABOUT FOREIGN
INVESTMENT OR MINERALS AND ENERGY, AUSTRALIANS DON'T
NORMALLY ASSOCIATE ALCOA WITH THE ARTS, MODERN OR
OTHERWISE. LOOKING AROUND TH IS ROOM, I SEE QUITE
A FEW PEOPLE NOT NORMALLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE ARTS.
3. ALCOA IS A SPLENDID EXAMPLE OF THE PHILANTHROPIC
FOUNDATION WHICH IS SUCH A NOTABLE FEATURE OF AMERICAN
BUSINESS LIFE. ( IT IS ALWAYS IMPORTANT TO DISTINGUISH
BETWEEN THE FOUNDATION AND THE CORPORATION.) ONE THINKS
OF SIMILAR GREAT FOUNDATIONS FORD, CARNEGIE, ROCKEJXFELLER.
THESE BODIES HAVE GIVEN MANY MILLIONS, INDEED BILLIONS,
OF DOLLARS TO THE ARTS, SCIENCE, EDUCATION, MEDICAL
RESEARCH AND OTHER HUMANE CAUSES. THEY HAVE BROUGHT
INESTIMABLE BENEFITS To AMERICAN SOCIETY, AND ENHANCED
THE REPUTATION, NOT ONLY OF INDIVIDUAL CORPORATIQNS,
BUT OF THE UNITED STATES HERSELF,
ll 
-2-
4, IN THIS ROOM TONIGHT ARE SOME OF THE MOST DISTINGUISHED
REPRESENTATIVES OF AMERICAN ARTISTIC AND BUSINESS LIFE.
I CANNOT REMEMBER A TIME WHEN A MORE CULTIVATED AND
ESTIMABLE GROUP OF AMERICAN CITIZENS VISITED THIS CITY.
I WISH ALL OF. YOU A VERY HAPPY , STAY IN AUSTRALIA. WITHIN
THE NEXT FEW WEEKS I SHALL BE MAKING MY THIRD VISIT TO
THE UNITED STATES AS PRIME MINISTER. I SHALL BE MEETING
PRESIDENT FORD FOR THE SECOND TIME. No ONE IN THIS
COUNTRY DOUBTS THE ENDURING STRENGTH OR IMPORTANCE OF
AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH THE UNITED STATES. MY OWN
GOVERNMENT'S FOREIGN POLICIES, WHILE SEEKING WIDER CONTACTS
' WITH OTHER NATIONS AND MORE MATURE AND INDEPENDENT
RELATIONSHIPS WITH COUNTRIES IN OUR REGION, HAS NEVER
DOUBTED THE UNIQUE VALUE OF OUR TIES WITH THE UNITED STATES.
I BELIEVE THE FRIENDSHIP AND UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN OUR
COUNTRIES HAVE NEVER BEEN STRONGER, OR MORE SOUNDLY
BASED, THAN THEY ARE TODAY.
WHATEVER CRITICISMS I MAY HAVE MADE OF PARTICULAR
AMERICAN POLICIES OR DECISIONS, I HAVE BEEN A LIFE-LONG
ADMIRER OF THE TRULY GREAT QUALITIES OF AMERICAN SOCIETY
ITS OPTIMISM, ITS GENEROSITY, ITS ZEST FOR CHANGE, FOR
INNOVATION, FOR SHEER ACCOMPLISHMENT. I BELIEVE WE SEE
MANY OF THESE QUALITIES IN INSTITUTIONS SUCH AS THE MUSEUM
OF MODERN ART IN NEW YORK AND THE ALCOA FOUNDATION. THE
EXHIBITION OF MODERN MASTERS WILL REMIND US OF THE BEST AND
MOST VIGOROUS STRAINS IN AMERICAN SOCIETY. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT LAND COMMISSION CEREMONY,
HAPPY VALLEY, ADELAIDE
11. 4.
Mr. Chairman, the Deputy Premier, Ministers, Commissioners,
Representatives, our colleagues in the Australian, South
Australian Parliament and Local Council, Ladies and Gentlemen-
I don't mind how often I come to functions like this because
this function is the forerunner of many which will take place,
we hope, throughout Australia and which will have two very
great advantages. One is, that the old Australian dream of
having a house of your own, will be more within the reach of
people because the cost of the land, the biggest single
component of the cost of having a house, will be kept to the
minimum. And the second feature is that people who come to
sub-divisions, like this, developed by the Land Commissions,
can be sure that all the facilities that the Local Council,
the State Government, the Federal Government provide, will
be all co-ordinated and supplied at the same time. There will
be, that is, a good block of land at cost with all services
and then with all the community facilities which the three tiers
provide. It's been most gratifying the way the community has
been involved in the planning of this first sub-division of any
Land Commission in Australia. Their advice has been sought,
it has been given. It is a very good example of full community
involvement.
It is very appropriate that the first Land Commission, the
first sub-division of any Land Commission should be here in
South Australia. There is an historical reason for my saying
that, and that is that Adelaide was the first piece of good
town planning in Australia. It was a magnificent foundatfon
that William Light gave for this city. And it is appropriate
enough that the Premier is over near the area he came from,
Penang, where his father set out another beautiful city,
another beautiful locality.
The other reason why it is so appropriate that we should be
having this opening in South Australia, is that the Government
of South Australia was the first to respond to the proposals
that my Government was making in this regard.
The creation of Land Commissions was proposed at the Federal
election in 1972 and it came from two very obvious propositions.
One is, that the Federal Government had greater financial
resources than the State Governments, and secondly, that the
State Governments had a jurisdiction in land matters which
the Federal Government did not have. So by bringing together
the Federal finances and the State jurisdictions, it would be
possible we thought, to solve one of the great social evils
in Australia today, and do so in a proper economic and environmental
context. 
The Federal Government cannot make laws, it cannot administer
laws, in regard to land use. The State Governments can,
and the Local Government bodies, semi-Government authorities
which they have created, play a big role in that as well.
But the limiting factor was that these days, no State
Government, no authorities created by State Governments,
had sufficient finances to provide all the services together
and to acquire the land. Now the Federal Government, while
not having the limitless funds that many people suggest or
suppose, nevertheless did have sufficient financial resources
to make it possible to acquire the land in good time and to
provide all the services which Governments have to provide
at the one time.
Whatever our idealogies, whatever our philosophies, we all
accept that Government authorities of one sort or another,
Federal, State, Regional, have to provide things like roads
and kerbing and guttering. They have to provide sewerage,
they have to provide telephones, they have to provide most
of the schools and most of the hospitals and most of the
public transport and the great evil which has arisen in
Australia since the war, where we have very large cities
and where a greater proportion of our population lives in
cities than is the case in practically any nation in the
world. In Australia we just haven't hitherto coped. Individuals
can't do it by themselves. Families can't. Communities
can't. It requires to bring together all the people
with the necessary responsibilities, authority and jurisdiction,
and that's what we have aimed to do in these Land Commissions,
and before 1973 was out, the basic legislation was passed and
my Minister, Tom Uren, and his counterparts in South Australia,
were able to make the arrangements under that legislation.
Now Adelaide isn't the largest city in Australia. It maybe
the best planned, but it's not the largest, never likelp to
be the largest. But the ways things are going it's likely
to continue to be the best planned, the best serviced. And
I suppose it not too invidious to say here, by way of comparison,
what still has to be done in the larger cities in Australia
because Sydney and Melbourne still haven't been able to secure
the services which are now being provided for new home seekers,
new home purchasers, in Adelaide. We have made the financial
agreement with New South Wales, not without some difficulty,
but we still haven't got a Commission. And then in Victoria,
we have an undertaking to have an Urban Land Council by the
end of Jdne next but nothing really has been done there. Now
it's a great pity that this time is being lost because it means
that thousands of families, in Sydney and Melbourne, are not
able to realise their hopes yet and where they use the existing
facilities that are made available for home seekers, they will
do so at a greater cost and they will get the blocks of land
less serviced with fewer amenities than they would otherwise
get. Now South Australia, true to its tradition of proper
town planning right from the outset, is leading Australia
again in proper town planning, not only in the square mile
in the centre, but right round Adelaide, in all the areas 
3.
from which people will commute into the city, in all
the areas where they will have community activities,
there will be accommodation and recreation and occupation
and it's been brought about because there has been, in
South Australia, ahead of anywhere else in Australia,
the necessary consultation and co-operation between the
Australian Government, the State Government and the
regional authorities.
It is a model of what can be done, this is not just a
dream, it's not just a theory, it is practical and it is
real and I am delighted, Mr. Deputy Premier, to be seeing
on an occasion like this, the culmination of the efforts
that you, your Premier, your Ministers, my Minister,
many of our colleagues and I, have sought to achieve
over the years. Your Premier, you yourself, I would
have counted as friends for well over a decade and it's
a proud moment when we are able to show to the whole of
the people 6f Australia and particularly to the people
of your State and your capital, what can be done by co-operation
beltween all the spheres of Government in Australia.
Individuals can't do it. They must depend for some action,
some initiative, some co-operation by those whom they elect
to serve them in councils and the South Australian Parliament
and the Australian Parliament and we are able to deliver
the goods now.
This area, these blocks will be $ 1,000 or more cheaper
than comparable blocks in the Adelaide metropolitan area.
They will be fully serviced. The Australian Departments,
I am happy to say, are co-operating in this effort~ and,
not only will there be the basic services, there will also
be some of the necessary amenities.
We want to see the people who come to live in virgin lands
in beautiful, fresh, new settings like this, and so many
of the natural features have been preserved. They will also
be able to get those things that any community wants and
which hitherto we have had to wait for generations to secure.
There will be, we believe, in the near future, proper
community centres in all these areas cultural, sporting,
and so on, and for those who have to stay closest to home,
in their . early years, I am now able to unveil a plaque
in the playground and in doing so I would like to express
the very great pleasure that the boys and girls who are
born and raised in this area will be able to grow up in
an ideal environment and the people who you have elected
in the various fields to serve you, are very happy to meet
so many of you and to be at your service, able to deliver
the goods in the way, I believe we are showing the whole
of Australia that it is possible to do. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I'm not sure that when I get to
the plaque I'll be able to speak as loudly as for you
all to hear. But I have to leave the microphone, so
what I'm going to do over there is unveil the plaque
I don't know what the wording is. This is always a hazard
in this job. You sometimes take away some screen and
thb Sun cartoon or even something offensive or indecent.
Coming to South Australia I suppose I can do it with
complete safety and assurance. Everything over ' 73,
' 74, ' 75 one's been able to co-operate with South
Australia in complete assurance and safety. So sight
unseen, I'm now going in this distinguished representative
gathering to unveil a plaque for the playground in the
first sub-division opened by any Land Commission anywhere
in Australia. was unveiled by me on the occasion of the opening of
the first sub-division of the South Australian Land
Commission, llth April, 1975. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P,,
AT THE OPENING OF THE FIRST SUBDIVISION
OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION,
HAPPY VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
11 APRIL 1975
I HOPE THIS WILL BE THE FIRST OF MANY SUCH OPENINGS
I SHALL ATTEND THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. IT IS APPROPRIATE
THAT THE FIRST SUBDIVISION OF LAND PURCHASED AND PREPARED
FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT BY A STATE LAND COMMISSION SHOULD
BE HERE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA. ADELAIDE WAS AUSTRALIA'S
FIRST PLANNED CITY. COLONEL LIGHT, THAT FAR-SIGHTED
SURVEYOR-GENERALWAS AUSTRALIA'S FIRST TOWN PLANNER
SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN ONE STATE WHERE COOPERATION BETWEEN
GOVERNMENTS IN THE INTERESTS OF OUR PEOPLE HAS ALWAYS -BEEN
PROMPT AND FRUITFUL. IT IS NOW ACCEPTED THAT GOVERNMENTS
EVERYWHERE SHOULD BE INVOLVED IN URBAN PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT NOT BECAUSE IT MAY BE SOMEONE'S PARTICULAR
HOBBY HORSE, NOT BECAUSE IT'S FASHIONABLE OR TRENDY, BUT
BECAUSE IT IS THE ONLY WAY TO IMPROVE OUR CITIES
AND MAKE THEM BETTER PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE.. IN...
h
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THIS SUBDIVISION HAS BEEN A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT. PLANNERS, BUILDERS,
LOCAL RESIDENTS, LOCAL BODIES, HAVE HAD A PART TO PLAY.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN CONSULTED; PEOPLE HAVE SAID WHAT THEY
WANT FOR THEIR NEW COMMUNITY. 
-2-
WE ARE GETTING AWAY FROM THE OLD IDEA OF CITIES BEING
BUILT AND PEOPLE BEING MOULDED TO FIT THEM ACCORDING
TO CONCEPTS IMPOSED FROM ABOVE OR FROM FAR AWAY, PEOPLE,
LOCAL PEOPLE, LOCAL NEEDS, ARE CENTRAL TO OUR THINKING,
I FIRST PROPOSED THE IDEA OF LAND COMMISSIONS
IN OUR ELECTION POLICY IN 1972, WE SEE THEM AS THE
ONLY PRACTICAL WAY TO BEAT THE SPIRALLING COST OF
BUILDING LAND. THE PRICE OF LAND IS THE SINGLE LARGEST
COMPONENT IN THE COST OF A HOME, THE LAND COMMISSION
PROGRAM OPERATES ON A VERY SIMPLE AND FUNDAMENTAL
PLANNING PRINCIPLE ADEQUATE LAND SUPPLY IS
NECESSARY TO PREVENT LAND PRICE INCREASES AT TIMES
OF HIGH DEMAND. THIS IS BECAUSE THE NATURE OF URBAN LAND
AS A COMMODITY MAKES IT PARTICULARLY LIABLE TO MARKET
MANIPULATION, PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS IGNORED THIS
PROBLEM, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN OUR SCHFME
FROM THE START, OTHER STATES WHERE LAND PRICES ARE
HIGHER THAN HERE ARE STILL DRAGGING THE CHAIN, YET
IN THIS SUBDIVISION WE CAN ALREADY SEE THE BENEFITS OF
OUR SCHEME, I BELIEVE THE BLOCKS OF LAND FOR SALE HERE
ARE ABOUT-$ 1,000 CHEAPER THAN COMPARABLE BLOCKS. 7IN
OTHER PARTS OF ADELAIDE,
PLANNED COMMUNITIES SUCH AS THIS WILL HAVE OTHER
PDVANTAGES APART FROM PRICE, . THERE WILL BE NO UNSIGHTLY
ELECTRICITY POLES, HERE, AS IN ALL OTHER LAND COMMISSION
SUBDIVISIONS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, THE VISUAL POLLUTION OF
UNSIGHTLY POLES WILL BE ELIMINATED AS THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
WILL BE UNDERGROUND, 
-3-
PROVISIONS WILL BE MADE FOR PARKS, RECREATION AREAS
AND PLAYGROUNDS SUCH AS THE ONE THIS PLAQUE WILL
COMMEMORATE. IDON'T THINK ANYONE WOULD ARGUE THAT RAPID
URBANISATION HAS BROUGHT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
ILLS TO OUR CITIES. TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, LOCAL
GOVERNMENT SERVICES HAVE BEEN MADE MORE COSTLY AND
DIFFICULT. 4I1fDUSTRIES HAVE MET WITH HIGHER COSTS,
THE ' ENVIRONMENT HAS SUFFERED. FOR ALL THESE REASONS
DON DUNSTAN' S GOVERNMENT AND my GOVERNMENT HAVE INITIATED
A SERIES OF POLICIES RELATING TO LAND USE AND LAND
PRICES. THE OBJECT IVE HAS BEEN TO REDUCE-THE
UNFORTUNATE CONSEQUENCES OF TOO RAPID URBANISATION.
THIS YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
ALLOCATED APPROXIMATELY $ 26 MILLION TO THE SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION BETWEEN ITS ESTABLISHMENT
IN NOVEMBER 1973 AND JUNE 19714, IT HAS PURCHASED
1226 HECTARES OF LAND WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE
ADEALIDE METROPOLITAN AREA. THIS YEAR IT IS
IMPLEMENTING A FURTHER PROGRAM TO ACQUIRE OR
PURCHASE 21432 HECTARES FOR URBAN DEVELO'PMENT AND 11173
HECTARES FOR MAJOR METROPOLITAN OPEN SPACES, IN
ADDITION THE COMMISSION HAS ENGAGED THE. SERVICES OF
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS IN THE FIELDS OF PLANNING,
ENGINEERING, SURVEYING AND VALUING. IN THIS WAY IT HAS
HELPED SUSTAIN DEMAND FOR THESE SERVICES THROUGH THE RECENT
PERIOD OF DECLINE IN BUILDING ACTIVITY. 
-3ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS A FINANCIER TO
THE LAND COMMISSION BUT IT HAS A MUCH WIDER ROLE THAN
THAT, MANY AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES AND
PROGRAMS HAVE A DIRECT IMPACT ON THE PROVISION OF
CAPITAL WORKS IN URBAN DEVELOPMENT THE P. M. G.,
DEFENCE INSTALLATIONS, EMPLOYMENT, OFFICES, ROADS,
UNIVERSITIES, HOSPITALS, SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, PART
OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY IS THE
EFFICIENT COORDINATION OF ALL SERVICES PROVIDED BY
STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS. THE LAND COMMISSION
IS A STATE ORGANISATION, STATE-RUN AND STATE-MANAGED:
BUT EXPERIENCE HAS SHOWN THAT THERE IS A PLACE FOR
JOINT EFFORT BY THE AUSTRALIAN AND SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS IN SHAPING THE BROAD STRATEGIC POLICIES
WITHIN WHICH THE COMMISSION FUNCTIONS,
THE LAND SUPPLY SHORTAGE IS LIKELY TO
BECOME CRITICAL, PARTICULARLY IN SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS THE WILL TO ACT BUT THE
STATES MUST ALSO PARTICIPATE. NEW SOUTH WALES HAS
SIGNED A FINANCIAL AGREEMENT, AND THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS LOOKING TO THAT STATE TO ACT-FIRMLY ON
A LARGE SCALE TO PREVENT FURTHER LAND PRICE INCREASES
IN SYDNEY. IN VICTORIA THE GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO
SET UP AN URBAN LAND COUNCIL'BY 30 JUNE THIS YEAR AND
ACTION ON THAT PROMISE IS URGENTLY NEEDED, ,/ 4 
DON'T IMAGIN4E THAT LAND COMMISSIONS ARE AL. L THAT
CONCERN US IN THIS FIELD. IN MAKING AUSTRALIA A BETTER
PLACE TO LIVE IN WE AIRE JUST AS CONCERNED WITH RURAL
AREAS AS WITH CITIES. OUR NEW DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT DEALS AS MUCH WITH THE WELFARE'OF
REfGlNS. AS IT DOES WITH CITIES, WE HAVE REACHED
AGREEMENT WITH THE STATES ON THE BOUNDARIES OF 76
REGIONS WHICH TH. E GOVERNMENT WILL USE AS THE BASIS
OF ITS PROGRAMS. LAST YEAR WIE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO
LOCAL COUNCILS GRANTS TOTALLING $ 56 MILLION THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, WE ARE PUSHING AHEAD WITH GROWTH CENTRES,
INCLUDING MONARTO IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA. WE HAVE
SAFEGUARDED THE NATIONAL ESTATE, THE UNIQUE AND
BEAUTIFUL THINGS, NATURAL AND MAN-MADE WORTH KEEPING
IN OUR COUNTRY. LAST FINANCIAL YEAR 101. NATIONAL ESTATE
PROJECTS WERE APPROVED AT A TOTAL COST OF $ 2.5 MILLION
WE ARE PROVIDING ASSISTANCE FOR.-ADELAIDE'S WATER
TREATMENT SCHEME. WE ARE CATCHING UP FURTHER WITH THE
SFWERAGE BACKL. OG IN THE MAJOR CITIES. IN THE LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR $ 38 MILLION WORTH OF APPROVED WORKS WERE
CARRIED OUT. A TOTAL OF $ 110 MILLION IS BE1ING MADE
AVAILABLE FOR WORKS STARTED THIS FINANCIAL YEAR. OUR
URBAN LOCAL ROADS PROGRAM IS DESIGNED TO IMPROVE THE
QUALITY OF RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND WILL INCLUDE A NUMBER
OF INNOVATIONS TO LIFT THE ENVIRONMENT STANDARDS OF ROADS
IN URBAN AND PROVINCIAL CENTRES. 
I CONGRATULATE THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION
AND THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ON COMPLETING THIS
FIRST SUBDIVISION, WITH GOVERNMENTS WORKING IN PARTNERSHIP
WE CAN ACHIEVE FAIRER LAND PRICES FOR THE HOMEBUILDER AND A
MORE CONGENIAL AND EFFICIENT ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL
AUSTRALIANS. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE COMMEMORATION DINNER, 2y
PORT AUGUSTA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
11.4.
M4r. Wallis, Mr. Smith, Ladies and Gentlemen,
We are meeting tonight at the road and rail crossroads
of Australia and we are meeting on a very great occasionan
important place, an important landmark in our history.
It was from this place in 1912 that the East-West Railway
commencod construction and tomorrow at Tarcoola we will
see the commencement of construction of the biggest railway
project since then.
This has been a remarkable week in the history of railways
in Australia. On Wednesday we tabled in the Federal
Parliament the terms of agreement by which the Commonwealth
Railways acquired' the South Australian Railways with the
consent of South Australia. Yesterday we passed through
both Houses of the Federal Parliament the Australian National
Railways Commission Bill, and, once the Governor-General has
signed that Bill, the Commonwealth Railways will become the
Australian National Railways; the A. N. R. And yesterday, too,
we introduced in the Federal Parliament the Inter-State
Commission Bill to establish that great instrument of national
co-ordination and unityywhich the Constitution ordains.
Before I come to describe some of these things, may I pay
a tribute to the manner in whi~ h the Commonwealth Railways
has just met a great test. For the first time since 19* 12,
the creek at Zanthus flowed and broke through the railway.
Within a fortnight the breach has been restored. The
Commonwealth Railways proved well able to cope with sudden
emergencies, unprecedented emergencies and ruptures.
What I want to speak about tonight is the great constructive,
creative role which is being played by the A. N. R. and, by
railways in general in our nation. In no area of Government
respoonsibility is there a greater need for modernisation and
reform than the railways. In no area have there been greater'
Constitutional and administrative obstacles to reform. The
railways are usually historically regarded as the great
instrument for unifyihng a continent. It was Transcontinentals
that united the United States, united the Canadian provinces
and united the Soviet Union from the Baltic to the Pacific.
One would have thought that railways would be the great
instrument for uniting Australia. It has not turned out that
way, because our railways were started in the middle of last
century by the States and they are still run, with the exception
of the by the States. This occurs in the Australian
Federal system only. In West Germany the railways are run by 
the Federal Government. In Canada there are two great
railway systems, one run by the Canadian Government and
the other by a nationwide, an international company. In
the United States all the railway systems are co-ordinated
by the Interstate Commerce Commission. In Australia, far
from uniting our country, the railway systems have been
organised so as to disrupt the unification of the nation.
They have been used to centralise our settlement, our
commerce, in State capitals. There is, fortunately, a
provision in the Constitution which enables the Commonwealth
with the consent of the States to build or to acquire railways.
It was because the States of South Australia and Western
Australia permitted the Commonwealth to build a railway, that
w.. e got the East-West railway. It was for that reason that
we got the old railway, which is always prone to floods from
Qodnadatta up to the Northern Territory border. It is because
of that provision that the Commonwealth, with the consent of
the State of South Australia, is now acquiring the nonmetropolitan
railways in South Australia. And this will
transform the railway scene in Australia, east and west and
north and south. It will be a very significant system and
it will be an immense re-inforcement and multiplication
of the things that can be done.
I look back to the first year or so I was in Federal
Parliament. The Chifley Government, under a Prime
Minister who was a dedicated railway man, had placed the
orders to modernise the Commonwealth Railways which had
always been the most losing railway proposition in Australia.
I came into Parliament just when the orders were being
fulfilled. The Commonwealth Railways became the first in
Australia to have every locomotive a diesel, to have every
carriage air-conditioned, to have every wagon with bolies.
Within the course of a year they became the most profitable
railway system in Australia. That illustrated to me that,
with proper equipment and proper capitalisation, railways
could be profitable.
But the railway system still ran from nowhere to nowhere
in national-commercial terms. It ran from Port Pinie'to
Kalgoorlie, which meant that every load, every passenger,
every piece of freight had to come over another system.
In 1972 one of the first Acts of my Government was to make
an offer to each of the States to accept responsibility for
the railways of that State. You see the first acceptance
of that offer, by South Australia. We will now have a
system where there will be a merger of the South Australian
Railways and the Commonwealth Railways. It will be possible
to cross the whole continent, east . or west, with the same
carriages, wagons and diesel locomotives. It will put an
end, I hope, to this absurd situation that, even after we
had the same gauge right across the continent,' the locomotives
had to be changed at Broken Hill and at Pinie and 
at Kalgoorlie. It has been a farce up till now. The
Commonwealth Railways, the Australian National Railways,
the are now the key to rail transport, the basic
form of transport in this nation. They will soon join with
the Victorian Railways in operating between Adelaide and
Melbourne. We shall soon see how unified a force, how
excel-lent an investment it is to have railways of a national
character. Railways can more safely, more quickly, more
economically, transport goods long distance than any other
transport mode that man has devised.
I now come to another achievement of this week the Bill to
establish the Inter-State Commission. In my 1972 policy
speech, I said " The Inter-State Commission was intended
to end the centralisation fostered by all the State governments
through their railway systems. It-should now provide not
only for the co-ordination of our six mainland railway systems
and our major ports in the period before the Commonwealth,
like other federal governments, inevitably takes responsibility'
for railways and ports; it is also the ideal instrument for
co-ordinating our major roads and airlines and pipelines."
" A Federal Labor Government-will promptly restore the
machinery the Constitution intended and vest it with the
Commonwealth's full constitutional powers to plan and
provide modern means of communications between the States."
One of the pieces of legislation we were able to put through
last year was the agreement between the Australian and South
Australian Governments for the Australian Government to build
the standard gauge railway between Adelaide and Cryst'al Brook.
When that is finished, it will be possible to go by train from
any State capital to the next State capital and, except for4
Melbourne, from any State capital to any other State capital
without a break of gauge.
One of the great handicaps to profitable railway operation
in this country has been the lack of adequate rolling'stock.
At present railways need over 3,000 extra wagons for intersystem
travel alone. It has been estimated that the Victorian,
South Australian, New South Wales and Commonwealth Railways
lost over $ 65 million in 1972-73 because they were not able
to meet the demands-of inter-system travel. Therefore, in
this year's budget, last September, we embarked upon a
continuing rolling stock purchasing program which, over
the next two years, will provide some 1300 modern bogey
wagons for inter-system use. These wagons will be available
for lease to the States. 
4.
Tomorrow we embark upon the construction of the railway
from Tarcoola to Alice Springs, the largest railway project
which Australia has undertaken since before the First World
War and one which will make an immense difference to the
people in The Centre. It will make a great difference to
the tourist industry, the cattle industry, the mining
industry. I have always found romance in the construction of railways.
Railways were a distinguishing feature of those industrial
countries which were settling vast new areas. The United
States, the old Tsarist Empire, Canada, all did it. Australia
had to wait to do it this century. A new railway has always
carried with it an aura of romance, a spirit of pioneering.
Nothing suggests more vividly the determination of a vigorous
society to develop its resources and improve its communications.
Something was missing from our national life during the long
years when the r4ilways were allowed to decline. Men and
families who have given a lifetime of service to the railways
were encouraged to lose faith in the importance and future of
a great industry. I hope and believe that we are seeing tonight
the rebirth of the railways in this continent, the beginning
of a new era of growth and development. You can be sure that
my Government will do its utmost to see the railways prosper
and resume their rightful, their historic role as the basis
of an efficient, modern and economical transport system.
A remarkable week it has been. A great disaster strikes
the Transcontinental railway; * it is overcome within a fortnight.
We set out to re-establish the Inter-State Commission ordained
in the Constitution. With the consent of South Australia, we
acquire the South Australian Railways. We create the Australian
National Railways. 1
It is appropriate to have this commemoration in Port Augusta
where it all began, where it all passes. Prosperous and
efficient railways are an efficient and essential condition
of a prosperous and efficient nation.
I give you the toast The Railways of Australia. 



352
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER$
\ THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM. M. P,,
FOR THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY,
SPORT AUGUSTA, SA,, 11 APRIL 1975
THERE COULD BE NO BETTER PLACE TO PROPOSE
A TOAST TO THE RAILWAYS OF AUSTRALIA THAN HERE IN PORT
AUGUSTA, THIS IS ONE OF THE GREAT RAIL TOWNS IN AUSTRALIA,
A GREAT RAIL JUNCTION, THE CENTRE OF A COMMUNITY WHOSE
HISTORY AND PROSPERITY ARE CLOSELY LINKED WITH THE PROGRESS
OF AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS, FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE POSTWAR
IMMIGRATION PROGRAM, WORKERS FROM MANY COUNTRIES HAVE
ENRICHED THIS DISTRICT AND MADE A MAJOR CONTRIBUTION NOT ONLY
TO THE RAILWAYS OF THIS COUNTRY, BUT TO THE STEEL INDUSTRY
WHICH HAS PROVIDED MUCH OF THE TRACK AND ROLLING STOCK ON
WHICH THE RAILWAYS DEPEND,
THE OPENING OF A NEW RAILWAY IS A RARE
EVENT IN AUSTRALIA. APART FROM THE STANDARD GAUGE LINK
BETWEEN ALBURY AND MELBOURNE,' OPENED IN 1962. THE TARCOOLA
TO ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY WILL BE THE FIRST MAJOR RAIL LINK
TO BE ESTABLISHED ON THIS CONTINENT SINCE THE TRANSCONTINENTAL
RAILWAY IN 1917. ALMOST HALF A CENTURY HAS PASSED SINCE
WE LAST MADE A SIGNIFICANT EXTENSION TO THE RAILWAY SERVICES OF
THIS COUNTRY* FOR A NATION OF SUCH VAST SIZE, WITH SUCH
SCATTERED RESOURCES, WITH SUCH A WIDELY DISPERSED, THOUGH
BY NO MEANS DECENTRALISED, POPULATION, IT IS CURIOUS
THAT THE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN NEGLECTED FOR SO LONG, CURIOUS,
BUT NOT ALTOGETHER INEXPLICABLE. FEDERATION, FAR FROM
DRAWING TOGETHER THE DIFFERENT CITIES AND REGIONS OF THE
CONTINENT, TENDED TO ENFORCE THEIR SEPARATION. S,/ 2 
-2-
FOR GENERATIONS THE RAILWAYS HAVE LANGUISHED IN A
MIASMA OF INTERSTATE RIVALRY, CONSTITUTIONAL DIFFICULTIES,
IMPOVERISHED STATE BUDGETS AND SHEER INERTIA ON THE PART
OF STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS.
IN NO AREA OF GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY IS
THERE A GREATER NEED FOR MODERNISATION AND REFORM. IN
NO AREA ARE THERE GREATER CONSTITUTIONAL AND
S ADMINISTRATIVE bBSTACLES TO SUCH REFORM. IN NO AREA IS THE
COST TO THE PUBLIC OF OUR-PRESENT ADMINISTRATIVE CONFUSION
AND PHYSICAL DILAPIDATION GREATER AND MORE ENTRENCHED.
OUR TRANSPORT SYSTEMS ARE OUTDATED, INEFFICIENT AND
UNECONOMICAL. RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEM IS FRAGMENTED
AND VAGUELY DEFINED. TRANSPORT IS THE CINDERELLA SERVICE
OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND THE RAILWAYS ARE THE
CINDERELLA OF OUR TRANSPORT SERVICES.
IN RECENT YEARS THE IMPORTANCE OF MODERN
RAILWAYS HAS BEEN INCREASINGLY RECOGNISED. THEY ARE
EASILY THE MOST EFFICIENT METHOD OF TRANSPORTING BULK
GOODS OVER LONG DISTANCES, BUT IT IS NOT SUFFICIENT TO
HAVE ADEQUATE STATE SERVICES. AN EFFICIENT RAILWAY
SYSTEM MUST BE AN EFFICIENT NATIONAL SYSTEM. IT MUST BE
ORGANISED TO MEET NATIONAL NEEDS AND PRIORITIES. THAT IS
THE APPROACH OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. THE PROBLEMS
OF INTERSTATE RAIL TRANSPORT ARE QUITE DIFFERENT FROM
THOSE OF URBAN TRANSPORT, 4 
URBAN TRANSPORT CAN PROPERLY BE LEFT TO THE STATES, THOUGH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS ACTIVELY ASSISTING THEM IN
THIS-FIELD. INTERSTATE TRANSPORT, MUST BE TACKLED FROM
A NATIONAL VIEWPOINT. WE ALL KNOW . THE NOTORIOUS BORDEN THAT OUR
RAILWAYS HAVE INHERITED FROM A COLONIAL PAST. THE
NATION IS STILL PAYING A HEAVY PRICE FOR RAILWAY SYSTEMS
CENTRALISED ON STATE CAPITALS AND CONSTRUCTED ON
INCOMPATIBLE GAUGES. THE POWER OF THE AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT TO LEGISLATE ON TRANSPORT IS ILL-DEFINED.
APART FROM A GENERAL POWERs-TO LEGISLATE IN'RESPECT OF
THE TERRITORIES, THERE IS NO SPECIFIC PROVISION IN THE
CONSTITUTION GIVING THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT POWER IN
RELATION* TO ROADS OR ROAD TRANSPORT, FORTUNATELY THE
CONSTITUTION IS MORE SPECIFIC IN RELATION TO RAILWAYS,
THE PROSPECT OF A NATIONAL RAILWAY SYSTEM WAS-FIRMLY IN
MIND WHEN THE CONSTITUTION WAS DRAFTED. SECTION 51-ALLOWSe
THE PARLIAMENT TO MAKE LAWS, WITH THE CONSENT OF A STATE,
FOR THE ACQUISITION OF ANY STATE RAILWAYS ON TERMS ARRANGED N
BETWEEN THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE STATE. FOR MANY YEARS THE
STATE RAILWAYS HAVE BEEN AN INSUPPORTABLE BURDEN ON STATE
GOVERNMENTS; DISTORTING THEIR BUDGETS AND DEPLETING THEIR
RESOURCES AT THE EXPENSE OF OTHER ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES. 
-4-
ALL FORMS OF TRANSPORT URBAN, RURAL AND INTERSTATE HAVE
, FALLEN DEEPER INTO DEBT AND OBSOLESCENCE. WHILE THE
STATES HAVE LACKED THE FUNDS TO PROVIDE MODERN TRANSPORT,
THE COMMONWEALTH IN GENERAL HAS LACKED THE POWERS, ON
TOP OF THAT WE HAVE A MULTIPLICITY OF TRANSPORT UNIONS,
ORGANISED ON A FRAGMENTED FEDERAL BAS. IS, TENDING TO
REINFORCE THE INEFFICIENCIES ENGENDERED BY INTERSTATE
RIVALRY. SOUTH AUSTRALIA IS LEADING THE WAY IN
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MORE ECONOMIC AND EFFICIENT RAILWAY
SERVICES. IN 1972 -IN ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS OF THE
NEW GOVERNMENT-I OFFERED TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE RAILWAYS OF ANY STATE PREPARED TO OFFER THEM.
VICTORIA AND QUEENSLAND REFUSED EVEN TO DISCUSS THE
OFFER, A WEEK AGO MR DUNSTAN AND I ANNOUNCED THE
AGREEMENT OF OUR GOVERNMENTS TO TRANSFER THE NON-METROPOLITAN
RAILWAY SYSTEM OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. THIS MEANS THAT THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WILL BE RELIEVED OF THE BURDEN OF MUCH OF THE
RAILWAYS: DEFICIT. DISCUSSIONS WITH THE OTHER STATES'HAVE
BEEN GOING ON FOR SOME TIME. IN ADDITION TO THE NEW LINE
FROM TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS, AN AGREEMENT HASBEEN
SIGNED WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA TO CONNECT ADELAIDE TO THE
EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE LINE AT CRYSTAL BROOK, THE
COMPLETION OF THIS PROJECT WILL MEAN THAT ALL MAINLAND
CAPITAL CITIES WILL BE CONNECTED TO STANDARD GUAGE, 
IN RECENT WEEKS WE HAVE TAKEN TWO OTHER
MAJOR INITIATIVES TO IMPROVE AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS,
ONE -F OUR GREAT INSTRUMENTS FOR THE REFORM AND
COORDINATION OF NATIONAL TRANSPORT WILL BE THE
INTER-STATE COMMISSION. LAST MONDAY I ANNOUNCED THE
GOVERNMENT'S INTENTION TO INTRODUCE -LEGISLATION TO
ESTABLISH THE COMMISSION. IN MY 1972 POLICY SPEECH
I SAID: " THE INTER-STATE COMMISSION WAS INTENDED TO
END THE CENTRALISM FOSTERED BY ALL THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THEIR RAILWAY SYSTEMS. IT
SHOULD NOW PROVIDE NOT ONLY FOR THE
COORDINATION OF OUR SIX MAINLAND RAILWAY SYSTEMS
AND OUR MAJOR PORTS IN THE PERIOD BEFORE THE
COMMONWEALTH, LIKE OTHER FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS,
INEVITABLY TAKES RESPONSIBILITY FOR RAILWAYS
AND PORTS; IT IS ALSO THE IDEAL INSTRUMENT FOR
CORODINATING OUR MAJOR ROADS AND SHIPPING A
LINES AND AIRLINES AND PIPELINES...
" A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL PROMPTLY
RESTORE THE MACHINERY THE CONSTITUTION INTENDED
AND VEST IT WITH THE COMMONWEALTH'S FULL
MODERN MEANS OF COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE STATES."
7-
-6-
OUR OTHER IMPORTANT MEASURE HAS BEEN TO
INTRODUCE LEGISLATION TO CREATE THE AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION. THIS WILL ' PROVIDE FOR THE.'.
INCREASINGLY WIDER FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
PRESENT COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS. THE COMMISSION WILL HAVE
THE ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONAL'POWERS
NECESSARY TO CONSOLIDATE THE STATE AND AUSTRALIAN
RAILWAYS INTO THE SINGLE SYSTEM ENVISAGED UNDER THE
GOVERNMENT'S RAIL TRANSFER PROGRAM,
MY. COLLEAGUE THE MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT
GAVE A VIVID INDICATION OF THE SCALE OF THE TASK
BEFORE US WHEN HE INTRODUCED THE LEGISLATION FOR THE
COMMISSION ON 20 FEBRUARY. HE POINTED OUT THAT
AUSTRALIA'S RAILWAYS ON THE WHOLE ARE IN A PITIFUL
CONDITION. FOR YEARS THEY HAVE BEEN STARVED OF THE CAPITAL
FUNDS NECESSARY FOR THEM TO KEEP ABREAST OF ADVANCES
IN RAILWAY TECHNOLOGY AND MEET THE TRANSPORT DEMANDS PLACE2
UPON THEM BY A GROWING ECONOMY, FOR EXAMPLE, WE HAVE THE
RIDICULOUS SITUATION WHERE STATE RAILWAY DEFICITS ARE
INCREASLNG AT AN ALARMING RATE, YET THE RAILWAYS HAVE HAD
TO TURN AWAY BUSINESS. RAILWAYS AT PRESENT NEED OVER
3200 EXTRA'WAGONS-FOR INTER-SYSTEM TRAFFICALONE. IT HAS
BEEN ESTIMATED THAT THE VICTORIAN, SOUTH AUSTRALIAN,
NEW SOUTH WALES AND COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS LOST OVER
$ 66 MILLION IN POSSIBLE REVENUE IN 1972-73 BECAUSE THEY
WERE NOT ABLE TO MEET THE DEMANDS OF ! NTER-SYSTEM TRAFFIC, 717 
-7-
THIS GOVERNMENT WAS QUICK TO REACT TO THE PROBLEM AND
IN THE 1974 BUDGET ANNOUNCED A CONTINUING ROLLING STOCK
PURCHASING PROGRAM WHICH OVER THE NEXT 2 YEARS WILL
PROVIDE SOME 1300 MODERN BOGIE WAGONS FOR INTER-SYSTEM
USE. THESE WAGONS WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR LEASE TO THE
STATES. TOMORROW I SHALL HAVE GREAT PLEASURE
S IN INAUGURATING THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW LINE FROM
TARCOOLA TO ALICE SPRINGS. : I HOPE THE LINE WILL COME TO
SYMBOLISE OUR COMMITMENT TO BETTER RAILWAYS IN AUSTRALIA,
IT WILL BE THE L6NGEST RAILWAY BUILT IN AUSTRALIA SINCE
THE TRANSCONTINENTAL LINK BETWEEN THIS CITY AND
KALGOORLIE. IT WILL BE APPROXIMATELY 830 KILOMETRES
LONG. . IT WILL BE BUILT THROUGH SOME OF THE MOST
INHOSPITABLE DESERT COUNTRY IN AUSTRALIA. WHEN COMPLETED
IT WILL PROVIDE CENTRAL AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA . WITH A
RAILWAY OF WORLD CLASS AND FREE FROM THE RISK OF
FLOODING. IT WILL GIVE THE PEOPLE OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
A FAST AND RELIABLE SERVICE, OF IMMEASURABLE BENEFIT
TO THE CATTLE AND MINING INDUSTRIES AND TO TOURISM. : 7l 
S w -8-
A NEW RAILWAY HAS ALWAYS CARRIED WITH IT
AN AURA OF ROMANCE# A SPIRIT OF PIONEERING. NOTHING
SUGGESTS MORE VIVIDLY THE DETERMINATION OF A VIGOROUS
SOCIETY TO DEVELOP ITS RESOURCES AND IMPROVE ITS
COMMUNICATIONS, SOMETHING WAS MISSING FROM OUR
NATIONAL LIFE DURING THE LONG YEARS WHEN THE RAILWAYS
WERE ALLOWED TO DECLINE. MEN AND FAMILIES WHO HAD
GIVEN A LIFETIME OF SERVICE TO THE RAILWAYS WERE
0 ENCOURAGED TO LOSE FAITH IN'THE IMPORTANCE AND FUTURE OF
A GREAT INDUSTRY. , I HOPE AND BELIEVE THAT WE ARE
0 SEEING TONIGHT, THE REBIRTH OF THE RAILWAYS IN THIS
COUNTRY, THE BEGINNING OF A NEW ERA OF GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT, YOU CAN BE SURE THAT MY GOVERNMENT WILL DO
ITS UTMOST TO SEE THE RAILWAYS PROSPER AND RESUME THEIR
RIGHTFUL, THEIR HISTORIC ROLE AS THE BASIS OF AN EFFICIENT,
MODERN AND ECONOMICAL TRANSPORT SYSTEM. PROSPEROUS AND
EFFICIENT RAILWAYS ARE AN ESSENTIAL CONDITION OF A
PROSPEROUS AND EFFICIENT NATION.
S. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT TARCOOLA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
FOR INAUGURATION CEREMONIES OF TARCOOLA/ ALICE SPRINGS RAILWAY
12.4 .1975
Everything we say on this platform is being recorded even if it
is not being amplified. So even if you can't hear us today, I've
no doubt you will play the record of the occasion for the rest
of your lives. Maybe.
We were introduced today by our colleacjue Laurie Wallace, the
M. P. for Grey, in which electorate Tarcoola forms the centre
and it was like old times for him, because he lived in Tarcoola
from 1949 to 1952 with Mrs. Wallace, I hasten to add, and his
first political meetings were in Tarcoola and there were no
amplifiers. He was the secretary of the Progress Association,
and now, now that he has become the Member for the district and
serving under a government of his colleagues he's been able to
ensure the progress of Tarcoola.
Now I had the opportunity last night, in the presence of most of
you, at a dinner at Port Augusta to recite the significance of
this occasion. An immensely-significant week, in the history
of Australian railways, Australian transport, Australia's national
development, unity and progress because earlier this week we made
the agreement to acquire the South Australian Railways, and then
we enacted the Australian National Railways Commission Bill, and
then we introduced the Interstate Commission Bill, all in the one
week. But a year ago, Mr. Dunstan and I signed an agreement to build
the Tarcoola/ Alice Springs Railway. It is not possible for the
Australian Government to build or acquire a railway in any
state without the co-operation of the State Government. Andia
the South Australian Government has been magnificently co-operative,
because a year ago it signed the agreement for us to build the
Tarcoola Railway up to the Northern Territory border. It signed
the agreement for us to build a new standard gauge railway between
Crystal Brook and Adelaide and of course it has now signed the
agreement for us to acquire the non-metropolitan railways in
South Australia. So it has been a most fruitful period.
And I suppose we have to concede that there were some supernatural
forces at work, because had it not been for the fact that early
last year there was -the longest interruption in the old narrow
gauge service between Maree and Alice Springs that there had been
in the history of the service. For nine weeks, the service was
out. Sam Calder, whose presence here* I am very happy to see, the
Member for the Northern Territory, gave us no rest at all and we
thought " Right! We can delay no longer in undertaking this new
railway project" an all weather, national and international
standard railway between the East/ West railway at Tarcoola and
Alice Springs. 
2.
And today we are inaugurating, we are commencing this largest
railway project in Australia since Prime Minister Andrew Fisher's
government inaugurated the East/ West railway in 1912. This is
a big occasion. Not only to Tarcoola, not only for South
Australia, and the Centre, but for the nation. A very big
project. $ 100 million. 830 kilometers. And first-rate road
bed and rolling stock. Of course the rolling stock is something
for which I will always remember this day.
I suppose every politician is supposed to be inordinately ambitious.
And I suppose when I became a law student and thought everything
would be terribly easy, I thought " Well, I suppose I'll be
satisfied if I get on the High Court."
It was many years that I was in the House of Representatives
before I thought I'd be able to do this job. I suppose it was
only after for some years I'd been watching people on the other
side. But I never dreamed that my ambition of having a locomotive
named after me would be fulfilled. I
In the early days of federation, the railway stations on the East/
West line were called after Prime Ministers Barton and Reid and
Watson right up to Hughes and so on. But in more recent years,
there have been locomotives called after Prime Ministers, and in
fact, after Ministers of Transport. It started as so many things
did with the Robert Menzies, and since then there's been the John
Gorton, and the William McMahon. All very formal. Then they made
a Ben Chifley, who I think was one of the greatest Prime ministers
and he did in fact know something about locomotives. Then there
was the George McLeay, and the Hubert Opperman, and the Gordon
Freeth, but now, the pride of. the fleet the Charlie Jones and
the Gough Whitlam.
Of course, Jones' initials are C. K. But a lot of people knowing
his addiction to railways think it ought to be the K. C. Caey
Jones a great name in railway history. But be satisfied with
it being called the Charlie Jones.
Now some people have said, unkindly I think, that also locomotives.
ought to be called after leaders on the other side. And in fact
this has commended itself to the railways management because this
would rapidly ensure the replenishment of the whole fleet. I'm
not sure that some of them would be happy about it because they
aren't always happy about people from the wrong side of the tracks.
But Charlie, you needn't worry about my faith in you. Sure I'd
like to be minister-for Transport. But you'd be my second choice.
And you'd do better than some of your colleagues on the platform.
Senator Bishop has been Postmaster-General for quite some time and
he hasn't got me on a postage stamp.* But Charlie Jones has got
me on a locomotive.
Now this is going to be a big occasion. I believe it is going to
take several forms. I have to push a plunger which will, after
some lapse of time, produce an explosion on a neighbouring hillside.
Then, I have to fill a barrel and this gives me the greatest
pleasure, next after naming the locomotive, because I've had to
push one for so many years. All by myself. So I have to go through 
that process. Then there is going to be the plaque on the tree.
One of the few trees on the immediate neighbourhood. And then
there is the naming of the locomotive. Now there will be some
interval. Because I am told that after I bash the plunger, the
magazines on the TV will have to be replenished so any delay will
be due to entirely media compulsions.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a very great pleasure to be here in
the middle of Australia on this very great occasion, because a
great number of people on the maps of Australia from now on will
find Tarcoola writ large and they will remember April 1975 for
a very great number of things. Symbolised, I think, I am sorry
about the fact, that these locomotives so freshly painted will
have to be repainted again next week to make it Australian National
Railways. But all these things are happening at the one time:
the biggest railway project in Australia since 1912; the creation
of the Australian National Railways; the acquisition of the South
Australian Railways; the introduction of the Interstate Commission
Bill. Ladies and Gentlemen, a lot of us have come a long way. But I
believe this will be regarded as a voyage, a trip very much to
be remembered. Thank you very much for coming here today.
I believe the people of Australia will remember what we've all
worked together to achieve today. 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G, WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY STATE COUNCIL, NSW. BRANCH,
SYDNEY, 13 APRIL, 1975
SINCE I ADDRESSED YOU LAST YEAR, OUR OPPONENTS HAVE
CHANGED LEADERS BOTH IN NEW SOUTH WALES AND IN CANBERRA.
THE INTERESTING THING IS THAT THE NEW LIBERAL LEADER IN
PLAYED A CENTRAL ROLE IN DESTROYING THE FEDERAL
LIBERAL LEADERX I DON'T WANT TO GET STUCK INTO MR SNEDDEN,
BUT THERE ARE IMPORTANT LESSONS TO BE DRAWN FROM WHAT WAS
DONE TO HIMX THERE ARE LESSONS NOT ONLY TO BE LEARNT BY
THE LIBERALS BUT BY USX
A BASIC WEAKNESS IN MR SNEDDEN' S POSITION WAS HIS
INABILITY TO ESTABLISH A SOUND RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
STATE NON-LABOR PARTIES AND THE FEDERAL LIBERAL PARTYy
PARTICULARLY AFTER THE QUEENSLAND ELECTIONS IN DECEMBER, THE
STATE NON-LABOR LEADERS THOUGHT THE EASY WAY FOR THEM, THE
CHEAP ROAD TO POLITICAL POPULARITY WAS JUST TO KNOCK CANBERRA,
TO BE AS UNCO-OPERATIVE AS POSSIBLEX MR SNEDDEN FELL INTO
THEIR TRAPX HE HAS PAID THE HEAVIEST POSSIBLE POLITICAL
PRICE FOR LETTING HIS STATE COLLEAGUES MAKE THE RUNNING''
2/, 
-2-
WHEN THE SENATE VACANCY OCCURRED WITH LIONEL
MURPHY'S MOVE TO THE HIGH COURT BENCH THERE WAS ONLY
ONE PROPER COURSE OPEN TO THE NEW LIBERAL PREMIER OF
NS. W. AND TO THE NS. W. PARLIAMENT THAT WAS TO
OBSERVE THE ESTABLISHED CONVENTION AND TO APPOINT A
LABOR REPLACEMENT ANY OTHER COURSE NOT ONLY SET ASIDE
A VALUABLE CONVENTION BUT SET ASIDE THE CLEAR WISHES OF
THE PEOPLE OF N. S. W. RECORDED AT THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION
LAST IIAYX MR LEWIS THOUGHT HE COULD PLAY IT SMART4
MR SNEDDEN KNEW WHAT THE RIGHT COURSE WAS, BUT FAILED TO
BRING MR LEWIS INTO LINEX MORE THAN ANY OTHER FACTOR, THAT
FAILURE SPARKED THE EVENTS WHICH LED TO MR SNEDDEN'S DOWNFALL
AS LEADERX HIS FAILURE TO ASSERT ANY AUTHORITY AS THE
NATIONAL LIBERAL LEADER, HIS SURRENDER TO MR LEWIS'
MAVERICK BEHAVIOUR, GAVE HIS OPPONENTS IN THE LIBERAL PARTY
THE AMMUNITION THEY NEEDED TO SHOOT HIM DOWN AND THEY DIDX
NOW THERE IS A LESSON FOR US ALL TO LEARN. AFTER
THE QUEENSLAND ELECTIONS, AND WHEN THE POLLS BEGAN TO GO
AGAINST US THERE WERE SOME PEOPLE IN THE STATE BRANCHES WHO
THOUGHT THAT THE SAFE COURSE WAS TO GO IT ALONE, TO STAND
ASIDE FROM A LABOR GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRAX 14OW THE FACT
IS THE STATE PARTIES, WHETHER THEY BE LABOR OR LIBERAL,
CANNOT LIVE TO THEMSELVESX FOR GOOD OR ILL THE PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO JUDGE THE PARTIES AS ONEK 
-3-
IT IS TRUE OF BOTH THE GREAT PARTIES BUT ESPECIALLY TRUE
OF THE LABOR PARTYX No MEMBER, NO CANDIDATE, NO LEADER
WILL GET ANY KUDOS FROM THE PUBLIC BY JOINING ANY CHORUS
AGAINST CANBERRAA IT IS EASY ENOUGH; BUT IT IS DECEPTIVELY
EASY BECAUSE THE PEOPLE ARE NOT AT ALL IMPRESSED* THEY
KNOW THAT THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS CARRYING OUT THE PROGRAM
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY ONE PROGRAM, FOR ONE PARTYK
WE ARE ALL GOING TO BE JUDGED BY OUR SUCCESS OR FAILURE
WITH THE PROGRAMA WE WILL SUCCEED WITH THE PROGRAM TO THE
EXTENT THAT THE WHOLE PARTY AT ALL LEVELS GETS BEHIND IT
AND GOES OUT TO SELL ITX
THERE ARE TWO ASPECTS ABOUT THE PROGRAM WHICH CALL
FOR A SPECIAL EFFORT BY ALL MEMBERS TO PROMOTE IT4 ONE
IS THAT A GREAT MANY OF OUR PROGRAMS ARE FIRST. DESIGNED TO
BENEFIT THOSE IN THE COMMUNITY WHO CAN'T SPEAK FOR
THEMSELVES OR WHO CAN'T MAKE THEIR VOICES HEARD VERY WELL)
ANOTHER ASPECT IS THAT SOME VERY IMPORTANT ISSUES LIKE
EQUAL ELECTORATES AND EQUAL REPRESENTATION DON'T ALWAYS
MAKE AN IMMEDIATE OR DRAMATIC APPEAL TO THE IMAGINATION OF
THE GENERAL PUBLIC OR, IT MUST BE SAID, FOR OUR OWN* MEMBERS
AND SUPPORTERS4 
-4-
THE PROGRAMS MOST LIKELY TO BE CHALLENGED, THE
PROGRAMS MOST LIKELY TO BE REVERSED BY OUR OPPONENTS ARE
THOSE WHICH BENEFIT THE INARTICULATE UNDER-PRIVILEGEDA
THE PROGRAMS MARKED FOR THE AXE ARE THOSE WHICH BENEFIT
THOSE WITH THE LEAST POLITICAL LEVERAGE) MR FRASER HAS
ALREADY MADE IT PLAIN THAT HE WILL CAMPAIGN FOR MASSIVE
CUTS IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING No MORE THAN HIS PREDECESSOR
WILL HE BE VERY SPECIFIC ABOUT THE AREAS IN WHICH HE WOULD
MAKE THOSE CUTSX BUT THE IRRESISTIBLE LOGIC THE LOGIC
OF ECONOMICS, THE LOGIC OF POLITICS IS THAT THE CUTS
WOULD BE MADE IN THE POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE AREASK
WHO IS POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE FOR MR FRASER? ALL
THOSE UNDER-PRIVILEGED GROUPS WHO WERE ENTIRELY NEGLECTED
IN THEIR 23 YEARS, WHOSE NEEDS WE HAVE TRIED TO IDENTIFY
AND TO MEETX THERE IS ALREADY A READY-MADE LIST OF
EXPENDABLE PROGRAMS THE PROGRAMS IMPERILLED BY THE HIGH
COURT CHALLENGE, ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT
DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEX THE CHALLENGE WAS INITIATED BY THE
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT, AND IS SUPPORTED BY THE N. S. W.
GOVERNMENTX ALL THESE PROGRAMS BENEFIT THE RELATIVELY
INARTICULATE OR UNDER-PRIVILEGEDK THE BENEFICIARIES ARE,
FOR THE MOST PART, SCARCELY IN A POSITION TO SPEAK UP FOR
THEMSELVESK THIS IS WHY THEY, AS OUR FELLOW-CITIZENS, ARE
SO VULNERABLEX THIS IS WHY PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO BENEFIT THEM
ARE, POLITICALLY, SO VULNERABLE.
q 4 
IF WE DON'T SPEAK UP FOR THOSE PROGRAMS, IF WE
DON'T SPEAK UP FOR THE PEOPLE WHO WOULD BE DEPRIVED BY
THEIR ABOLITION, THEN NO-ONE ELSE WILLK
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND ANY CONSISTENCY IN THE
APPROACH OF. THE N. S. W. GOVERNMENT TO OUR PROGRAMS4 IT
WOULD BE WRONG FOR ME TO GIVE THE IMPRESSION THAT THE
STORY HAS BEEN ONE OF TOTAL NON-COOPERATIONX THERE HAS,
IN FACT, BEEN A GREAT DEAL OF CO-OPERATION, ALTHOUGH THERE
HAS TOO OFTEN BEEN NEEDLESS DELAY EVEN IN AREAS WHERE THE
NS. W, GOVERNMENT HAS ULTIMATELY DECIDED TO COME TO THE
PARTYX IT WOULD BE CHURLISH NOT TO ACKNOWLEDGE ONE MATTER
IN WHICH THERE HAS BEEN PRAISEWORTHY CO-OPERATION FROM THE
NSW. GOVERNMENT MAKING AVAILABLE HIGHLY QUALIFIED PEOPLE
TO ASSIST IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INQUIRIES AND COMMISSIONSX
A NOTABLE EXAMPLE WAS THE WORK OF MR JUSTICE MEARES OF THE
SUPREME COURT ASSISTING SIR OWEN WOODHOUSE OF THE NEW
ZEALAND COURT OF APPEAL ON THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY ON
NATIONAL COMPENSATIONX
I MAY SAY THERE HAS BEEN IN CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
MOVEMENT A DISAPPOINTING LACK OF SUPPORT FOR OUR PROPOSALS)
WE HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT FOR A PARTY OF CHANGE AND REFORM
THERE IS, SURPRISINGLY, A GREAT DEAL OF CONSERVATISM WITHIN
OUR RANKSX 
-6-
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO THINK THAT JUST BECAUSE CERTAIN
FORMS OF COMPENSATION EXIST THROUGH THIRD PARTY INSURANCE
AND WORKERS COMPENSATION THEN NOTHING MORE NEED BE DONEK
" WHATE'ER EXISTS IS RIGHT" AN AMAZING ATTITUDE TO BE
FOUND IN A REFORMING PARTY) THE FACT IS THAT THE EXISTING
SCHEMES LEAVE THOUSANDS UNPROTECTED FOR EXAMPLE, PEOPLE
WHO ARE INJURED AT HOME, MANY OF THEM WOMENX OUR SCHEME
WILL COMPENSATE AND REHABILITATE PEOPLE WHO ARE INJURED OR
BECOME ILL ANYWHERE. AS I SAID IN THE POLICY SPEECH OF
1972: " WE WILL ESTABLISH A NATIONAL COMPENSATION SCHEME
TO REDUCE THE HARDSHIPS IMPOSED BY ONE OF THE GREAT
FACTORS FOR INEQUALITY IN SOCIETY INEQUALITY OF LUCK." I
HERE AGAIN THE BENEFICIARIES OF A LABOUR REFORM ARE NOT
WELL-ORGANISED AND ARE NOT ABLE TO DRUM UP PRESSURE, BY
CONTRAST THE OPPONENTS OR OBSTRUCTIONISTS ARE WELL-ORGANISED
SOME UNIONS, LAWYERS, INSURANCE COMPANIESX SOME-ONE HAS TO
SPEAK UP FOR THOSE WHO ARE NOT IN A POSITION TO MAKE THEIR
VOICES HEARD IN ANY POWERFUL OR WELL-ORGANISED WAYK THAT
IS A JOB FOR ALL OF US IN THE LABOR PARTY, NOT JUST A FEW
MINISTERS4 i 
THIS IS NOT ONLY A MORAL OBLIGATION FOR MEMBERS
OF A PARTY LIKE OURSELVES; IT'S NOT JUST AN OBLIGATION
WE HAVE BECAUSE THESE PROGRAMS ARE PART OF OUR PLEDGES
PUT TWICE TO THE PEOPLE STRONG SUPPORT FOR THESE PROGRAMS
MAKES SOUND POLITICAL SENSE AT THE STATE LEVEL AS WELL AS
THE NATIONAL LEVEL THERE IS NO DIVIDEND FOR STATE BRANCHES
IN DOWNGRADING NATIONAL PROGRAMS OR TRYING TO DRAW A
DISTINCTION BETWEEN STATE AND NATIONAL POLICIESK THE WAY
TO WIN A N. S. W. STATE ELECTION IS TO SHOW THAT A STATE
LABOR GOVERNMENT WILL CO-OPERATE IN THE AREAS AND THE PROGRAMS
WHERE THE LEWIS GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN INACTIVE OR OBSTRUCTIVE
WHEN THE PEOPLE HAVE TO CHOOSE BETWEEN SOLID PROGRAMS, SOLID
BENEFITS AND SLOGANS OR SHIBBOLETHS ABOUT STATE RIGHTS, THEY
WILL COME DOWN ON THE SIDE OF THE GENUINE ARTICLE, BUT THEYHAVE
TO KNOW WHAT THE CHOICE REALLY ISAND THAT MEANS THAT
ALL OF US HAVE TO PUT THE CASE AS FULLY AND FORCEFULLY AS
WE CANS SILENCE, OBSTRUCTION, CONSERVATISM OR TIMIDITY ON
SUCH MATTERS AS NATIONAL COMPENSATION OR EQUAL ELECTORATES
WILL NOT GAIN VOTES IN A STATE ELECTION NOT LEAST BECAUSE
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AND I MYSELF, WILL NOT CEASE TO
ADVOCATE THEM.( WE ARE NOT GOING TO BACK-TRACK ON'THEPLATFORM
OR ON THE UNDERTAKING GIVEN IN THE POLICY SPEECHESX
WE HAVE NO ALTERNATIVE; IT IS A COMMITMENT WE CANNOT ESCAPE?\
IT IS A COMMITMENT FOR THE WHOLE PARTY; IT IS A COMMITMENT
THAT NO-ONE IN THE PARTY CAN ESCAPE
Bilge. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH, ST. JOSEPH'S SCHOOL, MOOREBANK, N. S. W.
13.4.1975 It's true that the parish priest revealed that I was looking up
the article on Thomas Moore, not the one that is usually referred
to in this circle, not the saint but the land-owner. He was a
very good citizen. In 1810 he was declared a magistrate for
Liverpool, and he accompanied Macquarie when Macquarie later in
December 1810 surveyed the whole of this area and declared
Liverpool one of the original Macquarie towns.
So in Australian terms, the terms of settlement, European
settlement in Australia, Liverpool and Moorebank, are significant
indeed. But while I must concede, and of course I am a separated
brother too, it might be embarrassing to refer to the fact that
Thomas Moore, the Australian one, had left his property to the
Church of England, and had thus endowed Moore Theological College,
and I must confess that some of the priests who come from there,
are just as tough on me as some of those who come from the
Catholic Centre.
But I did notice, this is why I brought it here, he did in this
district, contribute toward ' s the building of a two-storey church
school and a court house opened in 1813, a Catholic Chapel in
1821 and a Presbyterian Church in 1826, a very early but significant
ecumenical attitude. But how this district has grown. I've
represented it now for well over 20, years and one of the great
joys one has is coming to the opening of new buildings and it's
now possible to an extent that one would never have dreamed when
I first became the Member to get a good education, to have the
whole range of recreation, occupation, education close at hand
in areas like this.
This is a very beautiful use of this site. A high site, an% from
here, one can look over the buildings which are over a century and
a half old, and yet one can be quite close to some occupations
which are as old as that and others which are quite new. We are
living in an area and the children who come to this school will be.
living in an area which is old, but which is perennially new.
And I think they're very fortunate to live in an area * which is
still being developed with a good regard to the environment,
preserving the old and making the new fit in with it.
I notice on the program, and immensely flattering, that I am to
declare the school open. I think we've been beaten to it a bit.
I think the children have been using it to very good purpose for
some time. But nevertheless, I can't help saying that there have
been times in my career and not going back twenty years or so ago
when it would have been utterly unthinkable for a person of my
politics to be asked to declare open a Catholic School, and I
hope you'll forgive me for saying that TI think now by our deeds
you can judge us. 
You can see that a very great numaber of the things which were
said about us were not factual as well as not being particularly
charitable, and it is true enough as Father Duncan said that
there is inflation and so oni but quite apart from inflation,
the amount of money which is being spent on education is
incomparably greater than would be required by any compulsion
of population or migration.
Three years ago, the amrount of money being spent by the Federal
Governmrent on Catholic education throughout Australia was barely
million. This year it is three and a half times as much.
It is over'$ 100 million. Now that is certainly very much more
than would be required by an increase in enrollment or an
increase in inflation during that period, and the principle that
we have adhered to throughout is that it should be possible for
children wherever they live, whatever their parents' means,
whatever their parents' beliefs, whatever their parents' occupatign,
it should be possible for their children to have as good an
education as this country can provide.
And the basis upon which we make that provision is perfectly open.
It's under an Act of Parliament. It is administered by a
Commission, whose membership is appointed by the government of
the day. I've never heard any criticism of the people, the men
and women, both lay and religious who have been appointed to
that Commission. It is a very diligent Commission. It's had
a very serious job to do, and we are shortly to receive the
recommendations that it makes for the school-years 1976 and 1977,
but the ones that it made for 1974 and 1975 have, I believe,
transformed education in Australia, and I would be able to say
that if I went to any State school, if I went to any Catholic
school, or if. I went to any non-government, non-Catholic school.
The fact is we are wanting to see the children, irrespective any of
their faith or means are able to get a good education where they
live. If they're isolated and can't have it where they live, then
there is assistance for them to have it as boarders where the
proper form of education will be available for them. There are
a very great number of other programs, disadvantaged schools,
handicapped children, migrant children, children who don't speak
English at home, where additional special assistance is being made.
Ladies and Gentlemen, three years ago, if I'd come along and said
that there would have been a very great number of doubting Thomases
among you, and -what I-. said would have been received with scepticism
if not disbelief, and it is a very great pleasure on this occasion,
after seeing what has been done, what we've put through the
Parliament, not without difficulty, not without a very great deal
of criticism of " Where's the money coming from, doesn't Government
expenditure produce inflation?", all this sort. of argument. 
We'll have it still more when the next recommendations come in
this year's budget, from the Schools Commission for the school
years 1976 and 1977. I think I can say with complete conviction,
we will not be deterred from government expenditure on things
such as education.
The very best investment that a country can have is in the rising
generation, and having represented areas like this for a long
time, I'm determined to see that areas like this which didn't
have all the schools or as good schools as were needed in the
government or Catholic sectors that they will get as good as any
other areas.
But I can say that at any school. I can say that at any area.
The pattern is open. It is unremitting. It gives me very great
pleasure indeed to see that the young children of this area, this
historic area, this still beautiful area will be able to come to
a good useful, yquthful school. A good staff, good equipment, gqod
grounds, good building. But always I trust getting better. It is
a very great pleasure to have been asked here and it is an immense
compliment to have been asked to declare St. Joseph's Primary
School, Moorebank, officially open. I do so with the greatest
pleasure, and I am sure that all the staff and the parents will
be proud of this school and the children will have a very much
more useful life as a result of going to such a good school. 



PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO N. S. W. STATE COUNCIL
OF THE SYDNEY
13.4.1975 It was the Fisher Labor Government which inaugurated the
East/ West Railway and yesterday I symbolically inaugurated
the largest railway project in Australia since that time
a railway of about 830 kilometers costing $ 100 million, and
if I may respond to what John Ducker was saying by way of
introduction, this weekend in South Australia we did two
things which I believe indicate what could be done by
co-operation between a Federal and a State Labor Government.
We inaugurated the first subdivision under the Land Commission
of South Australia. This is a proposal which we came out with
in 1972. The Australian Government can't make laws concerning
land use. Every State Government can. -But the Federal
Government's'financial resources are much greater than those'
of the State Governments. If you bring them together, you can
see ' that by Federal finance you can acquire sufficient land
for expanding urban development, and with State co-operation
you can see that that land is fully serviced and is made
available at cost.
We did it on Friday in South Australia. Then we went on to
the middle of Australia and climaxed the remarkable week
in the history of railways in Australia. Because this week
we tabled on Wednesday morning in the House of Representatives
the Heads of Agreement by which the Australian Government will
acquire the South Australian Railways. That night the Senate
passed the Australian National Railways Commission Act and on
Thursday we introduced the legislation for the Interstate
Commission, which is mentioned in the Constitution, and which
was supposed to make it possible to co-ordinate transporta
modes throughout Australia, and I think I can say that by the
end of June we will have oh incidentally, we will later this
month be making similar arrangements with Tasmania to acquire
Tasmanian Railways by the end of June we will have in operation
in South Australia and Tasmania and maybe one or two other
States, the free hospital services throughout Australia.
I point out that these things are perfectly feasible. There
is no Federal intrusion or aggrandisement. There were free
hospitals throughout Australia when Labor went out of office
in 1949, ' under a five year agreement which the Chifley Labor
Government had made with every State Government, Labor and
Liberal, and after the agreements had run their five years,
the Menzies Government did not renew them, and therefore we
ceased to have free hospital services in Australia except in
those States which kept them on through their own resources.
Of course, only one State has done it Queensland. Sure you
have free hospital services there, but they're the worst
anywhere in Australia. 
And similarly the Constitution has always said that the
Commonwealth can build or acquire a railway in a State with
the consent of the Government of that State. Now we've done
these things. We've restored free hospitals in the two Labor
States, and we have acquired the railways in the two Labor
S-tates. And if that were done everywhere in Australia, all
this nonsense we hear about the financial burdens of the States
would be ended.
And I put it to you bluntly: We won't remain in power federally,
and you'll not get into power in the States if you fall for
this line which was around at the end of last year that the
way to survive was to blast Canberra. It'll get nobody anywhere.
But by co-operation between the Federal Labor Government and
the two State Labor Governments we have in Australia, we will
have solved the financial problems in those two States. We will
have at last decent railway systems in two States and we will
again have free hospital services in two States.
Now. I come back to what I've said. Since I addressed you last
year, our opponents have-changed leaders, both in the New South
Wales Parliament and the Australian Parliament. The interesting
thing is that the new Liberal leader in New South Wales played
a central role in destroying the Federal Liberal leader.
There are important lessons to be drawn from what was done
to Mr. Snedden. There are lessons not only to be learnt by
the Liberals, but by us.
A basic weakness in Mr. Snedden's position was his inability
to establish a sound relationship between the State non-Labor
Parties and the Federal Liberal Party, particularly after the
Queensland elections in December. The State non-Labor leaders
thought the easy way for them, the cheap road topolitical
popularity was just to knock Canberra, to be as unco-operative
and as obstructive as possible. Now the fact is the St~ te
Parties, whether they be Labor or Liberal, cannot live to
themselves. For good or ill, the people are going to judge
the Parties as one. It's true of both the great Parties, and
especially true of the Labor Party. No member, no candidate,*
no leader will get any kudos from the public by joining any
chorus against Canberra. It is easy enough, but'it is deceptively
easy because the people are not at all impressed.
They know that the Labor Government in Canberra is carrying out
the program of the Australian Labor Party. One program for onc
party. We're all going to be judged by our success or failure
with that program. We will succeed with the program to the
extent that the whole Party at all levels gets behind it and
goes out to sell it. There are two aspects about the program
which call for a special effort by all members to promote it.
It's that a great many of our programs are first designed to
benefit those in the community who can't speak for themselves,
or who can't make their voices heard very well. Another aspect
is that some very important issues such as equal electorates and
equal representation don't always make an immediate or dramatic
appeal to the imagination of the general public or, it must be
said, for our own members and supporters. 
The programs most likely to be changed, the programs most
likely to be reversed by our opponents, are those which benefit
the inarticulate and the underprivileged. The programs marked
for the axe are those which benefit those with the least
political leverage. Mr. Fraser has already made it plain that
he will campaign for massive cuts in Government spending.
No more than his predecessor will he be very specific about
the areas in which he would make those cuts. But the
irresistible logic, the logic of economics, the logic of
politics is that the cuts would be made in the politically
expendable areas. Now who is politically expendable for
Mr. Fraser? All those underprivileged groups who were entirely
neglected in their 23 years in office, whose needs we have tried
to identify and to meet. There is already a ready-made list of
expendable programs, the programs imperilled by the High Court
challenge on the constitutional validity of the Australian
Assistance Plan and the Regional Employment Development Scheme.
The challenge was initiated by the Victorian Government and it
is su~ pported by the New South Wales Government. All these
programs benefit the relatively inarticulate or underprivileged.
The beneficiaries are for the most part scarcely in a position
to speak up for themselves. This is why they, as our fellow
citizens, are so vulnerable. This is why programs designed to
benefit them are politically so vulnerable. If we don't speak
up for those programs, if we don't speak up for the people who
would be deprived by their abolition, then no-one else will.
It's impossible to find any consistence in the approach of the
New South Wales Government to our programs. It would be wrong
for me to give the impression that the story has been one of
total non-co-operation. There has in fact been a great deal of
co-operation, although there has too often been needless delay
even in areas where the New South Wales Government has ultimately
decided to come to the party.
It would be churlish not to acknowledge one matter in which
there has been praiseworthy co-operation from the New South
Wales Government, making available highly qualified people to
assist in Australian Government enquiries and commissions.
A great number of New South Wales judges have been made available
by Sir Robert Askin to serve on our enquiries and commnissions.
Let me give you one instance here, where I must say I'm
disappointed by the obstruction one finds in the Labor movement,
and particularly-in the Trade Union movement. It is the proposal
for national compensation. True we've had for years ever since
the Lang Labor Government we've had compulsory workers'
compensation in New South Wales, and ever since the McKell
Government we've had compulsory third party insurance for people
injured on the roads.
But there are still a great number of people for whom there is
no cover at all, and for those where there is cover, or where
there appears to be, it is quite problematical how much you'll
get and how long you'll have to wait for it. Now we've come
out with full proposals here, and it is amazing the link there
is between some trade union people and the insurance companies
in obstruction. 
The fact is that the existing schemes leave thousands
unprotected. For example, people who are injured at home,
many of them women. Our scheme will compensate and
rehabilitate people who are injured or become ill anywhere.
It will be done automatically, and there will be a proper
income until they are rehabilitated.
Now this has been something which many of us have spoken about
for years. It has been in the Party platform for some years.
It was in the policy speech in 1972 and in 1974. 1 must say
I am disappointed, and I resent it that some union secretaries
make an alliance with lawyers and with insurance companies to
keep the old system.
That is are we to be the conservative party? Whose interests
do we have in mind? Now here again the beneficiaries of a
Labor reform are not well organised and they're not able to
drum up pressure. By contrast the opponents, or obstructionists
are well organised some unions, lawyers, insurance companieb.
Someone has to speak up for those who are not in a position
to make their voices heard in any powerful or well-organised
way. That is a Job for all of us in the Labor Party, not just
a few ministers. I do hope all of you will see what is at stake
here, and will speak up for it.
There is not much point in putting things in the platform and
getting a Government which tries to carry out the platform and
then have people, including those in the Labor Party, with very
dubious allies jeopardising it and sabotaging it. Now this is
not only a moral obligation for members of a Party like ourselves.
It is not just an obligation we have because these programs are
part of our pledges put twice to the people. Strong support for
these programs makes sound political sense, at the-. State level
as well as the national level. There is no dividend for state
branches in downgrading national programs or trying to draqw a
distinction between State and national policies.
I heard on the radio that Neville Wran was making the point this
morning in addressing you that the present State Government was
seriously neglecting the growing areas of this State and was
showing concern solely for those areas where it felt it had
political obligations itself.
Now I know that a very great number of people, including people
in State branches and State Parliament resent it if one exposes
shortcomings in the State. That is surely a false patriotism
to assert that everything in the State garden is lovely. It is
not. And we got into power federally because we were able to
convince the people in Sydney and Melbourne in particular that
there were things grievously wrong in the State backyards, that
they could be cured if there was federal interest shown in them,
but they would only be cured if there was a Federal Labor
Government showing interest in them. 
Now many people in the Party think well this means that we
are neglecting existing areas. I'd like you to take this
approach to it. If we were to find a country town grow up
every year of the size of the increase in population in Sydney
we'd want to see that that country town had proper schools
and hospitals and transport connections and so on.
But because it happens in an already large place, like Sydney
or Melbourne, we're neglected. Now what we're saying what
Neville Wran says this morning, what I say this afternoon is
that we must look after those western and southern suburbs,
we are merely acknowledging that governments have an obligation
to people wherever they choose to live, and it's those suburbs
that are the growing areas in this State. It's not that one is
neglecting the areas which are already full, which are already
supplied, which are already serviced, which are relatively
static in population, it merely-is that we say that if people
have to go and live or choose to go and live in those new
areas then it's our obligation, as a Party seeking office to
see that the Governments which we elect of which we are the
supporters and members see that there are proper services
in those new areas.
If you have a city of 20,000 in the country you'd certainly
see that it had proper services. If an equivalent population
comes in some part of the metropolitan area it's no less
obligatory on us to see that there are services there. Now
it is true that since the War, there have been a considerable
number of large country towns which have grown up. The
population of Wollongong for instance has much more than doubled
since the War, or of Mt. Isa, or of Gladstone, or Whyalla, and
very properly governments have seen that they get services
to match.
In Sydney and Melbourne where an equivalent population arises,
State Governments in general have neglected them, and it'gno
less than the statistical truth to say that in the western
suburbs of Sydney there are not the hospital facilities that
there are in the areas where the population is more static as
in the country or the older parts of Sydney. And there are
not the facilities for teachers' colleges or technical colleges
or colleges of advanced education or universities in those areas
that there are in the longer-settled parts of the city.
And it is a false patriotism which says that the Federal
Government has no role to play in interstate highways: of
course it hias. It has an obligation under the Constitution
to look after trade and commerce with other countries and
between the States.
With the Hume Highway, the busiest road in the southern
hemisphere, and one of the worst, the State Governments-. have
not been able to make a decent road. Are people to complain
when you have a Federal Government which will accept its
obligation to see that roads like that at least are made
trafficable all the year round? 
And again, there are areas such as this port of Sydney, the
busiest port in the southern hemisphere, but a grossly
inefficient port. There again it deals with interstate or
international trade, and it ought to be the function of a
Federal Government to see that the communications with that
port from other ports are made efficient.
This is not an intrusion. It is a responsibility of the
Australian Government under the Constitution and we ought to
see that the port is improved. If you lend yourself to the
argument that the Federal Government shouldn't come into the
Hume Highway, or shouldn't come into the port of Sydney,
you're just saying that the Hume Highway is going to continue
to be inadequate and the port of Sydney is going to get less
and less efficient.
Now the way to win a New South Wales State election is to show
that the State Labor Government will co-operate in the areas
and the programs where the Lewis Government has been inactive
or obstructile. When the people have to choose between solid
progriams, solid benefits, and slogans or shiboleths about State
rights, they will come down on the side of the genuine article.
But they have to know what the choice really is. And that means
all of us have to put the case as fully and as forcefully as
we can.
I myself earlier mentioned about the question of distribution
of electorates and so on. Let me give you the figures for
this State because I believe they will illustrate one of the
things where one will be able to draw a very easy comparison
between us and our opponents in the coming months.
The population of an electorate in the House of Representatives
in this state ought to be 63,000, i. e. the average of the
whole State divided by the number of electorates. But tIW
proportion at the moment varies grossly. There are some'I
electorates which are 32% above that amount, i. e. an enrollment
of 83,000 and there are some which are 26% below, namely
46,600. Now if you have electorates that different 83,000 and 46
thousand quite-obviously the people in those electorates are
not having an equal say in electing Members of Parliament.
They're not having an equal share in making the laws. They're
not having equal access to the things which Governments have
to provide. Theseare not exceptions. These are ones which you
can see in many cases. Now I quoted one electorate which had
83,000 people on the rolls at the moment: that is the electorate
of Mitchell. There's another, Robertson which has 81,000.
Chifley has 80,000. MacArthur has-79,000, and Macquarie, a
country electorate incidentally, has 74,000. Now take the
other ones. The smallest one which I have quoted 46 thousand
is Darling. There is Hume which has just under 50,000. There
is Sydney, obviously a metropolitan electorate which has 51,400.
There is Riverina 52,000, and Wentworth, again, a city
electorate, 52,000. Now this is not a fair 4o. 
Some people might say " Oh, you mustn't touch these things.
People will think there is something crook about it." The
fact is it won't deter the Government from supporting an
equal form of distribution. It is the fair thing. It is
the just thing, and it is possible to come out with a
distribution where no electorate has more than 5,000 people
on the rolls than any other electorate in a State.
What we've come out with the distribution which has been
made, which is being proposed ensures that those with the
smallest enrollment are the electorates which are growing
fastest, and those with the largest are those which are growing
slowest.
Now I do ask you to stand on your principles in these things.
You'll get no votes, you'll get no respect by departing from
your principles, and if you look at the facts, you can embarrass
your opponents. You will get respect and success for us.
Silence, obstkuction, conservatism or timidity on such matters
as the equal electorates or what I've mentioned earlier,
national compensation, will not gain votes in a State election
not least because the Australian Government, and I too, will
not cease to advocate. We are not going to back-track on the
platform, or on the undertakings given in the policy speeches.
We have no alternatives. It is a commitment we cannot escape.
It is a commitment for the whole Party. It is a commitment
that no-one in the Party can escape.
Ladies and Gentlemen, don't let's think that just by running
dead or knocking the Government you've had, that you'll help
it or you'll get a State one. The way to provail is to carry
through against the attacks of our opponents, the obstruction
of our opponents, the attacks, the obstruction in the Parliament,
in the papers, in the courts. We won on these platforms and we
will win again on these platforms. If we weaken, if we ae
divided on them we won't survive ourselves and nobody else will
do any better, either, in any section of the Party. 



APPROPRIATION BILL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
17 APRIL 1975
JUST OVER FIVE MONTHS AGO, ON 12 NOVEMBER 1974, 1
ANNOUNCED TO THE HOUSE A SERIES OF ECONOMIC MEASURES WHICH
SUPPLEMENTED ACTION ALREADY TAKEN IN THE BUDGET. THE
MEASURES HAD FOUR OBJECTIVES:-
FIRSTLY, TO MAINTAIN CONSUMER DEMAND THROUGH
A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN PERSONAL INCOME TAXa
SECONDLY, TO ATTACK INFLATION BY REDUCING THE
PRESSURE FOR WAGE INCREASES THROUGH A SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT IN AFTER-TAX TAKE-HOME PAY THIS YEARS
THIRDLY, TO ENHANCE BUSINESS PROFITABILITY BY A
REDUCTION IN COMPANY TAX AND OTHER MEASURES.
FOURT'HLY, TO SUPPORT PARTICULAR INDUSTRIES WHERE
SPECIAL PROBLEMS WERE EMERGING,
ANNOUNCING THESE MEASURES IWARNED THAT IT WOULD
TAKE CONSIDERABLE TIME FOR THE MEASURES TO TAKE THEIR FULL
EFFECT AND THAT FOR SEVERAL MONTHS THE FIGURES' UNEMPLOYMENT*
THE COST OF LIVING INDEX -' WOULD NOT BE GOOD, WE ARE NOW
BEGINNING TO SEE THE UP-TURN WHICH WE HAVE SOUGHT SO EARNESTLY. 
-2-
APART FROM THEIR DOMESTIC SIGNIFICANCE THE FIGURES
SERVE TO REMIND US OF THE OUTSTANDING CHARACTERISTIC OF
AUSTRALIA'S PRESENT ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES THEY ARE
INTERNATIONAL, THEY ARE WORLD-WIDE IN CHARACTER AND
WORLD-WIDE IN INCIDENCEY GOVERNMENB IN COMPARABLE COUNTRIES
ARE GRAPPLING WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF HIGH'UNEMPLOYMENT
AND RAPID INFLATIONj MOST GOVERNMENTS HAVE ADOPTED MEASURES
SIMILAR TO THOSE OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, ALL
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THERE IS-NO SINGLE OR SIMPLE SOLUTION FOR
OUR COMMON PROBLEMSK NO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN MORE ENERGETIC
IN THE QUEST FOR A SOLUTION OR MORE FLEXIBLE IN ITS
APPROACH THAN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTi
THE EXTRAORDINARY SPEED WITH WHICH ECONOMIC
CIRCUMSTANCES CHANGE IN ALL MODERN MIXED ECONOMIES REQUIRES
AN ALTOGETHER NEW DEGREE OF FLEXIBILITY IN ECONOMIC
DECISION-MAKING WE DO NOT INTEND TO BE SCARED OFF FRQM
MAKING NEEDED AND PROPER CHANGES BY CHEAP CHARGES OF
INCONSISTENCYy ECONOMIC CIRCUMSTANCES HERE AND THROUGHOUT
THE WORLD ARE NOW SUBJECT TO RAPID CHANGE NEVER EXPERIENCED
IN OUR LIFETIMES/ THE BUSINESS CYCLE WHICH USED TO TAKE
FIVE TO. SEV. EN YEARS FOR ITS COMPLETION NOW APPEARS TO TAKE
ABOUT TWO YEARSA THIS IMPOSES UNPRECEDENTED PRESSURES ON
GOVERNMENTS AND REQUIRES VERY GREAT FLEXIBILITY IN POLICY
PLANNING,. 
-3-
IN THIS SITUATION ONE HAS TO BE EXTREMELY CAREFUL IN
MAKING PREDICTIONS BASED ON THE LATEST SET OF ECONOMIC
INDICATORS, WE MUST BEWARE OF FALSE DAWNS.
NONETHELESS, THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR SOME CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM,
THE SITUATION AT PRESENT IS THAT SOME OF THE MORE SERIOUS
ASPECTS OF DECLINE IN ACTIVITY ARE NOW BEHIND US. CREDIT
IS FREELY AYAILABLE AND THE DEMAND FOR FUNDS, PARTICULARLY
FOR'HOUSING, IS HIGH, IMPORTS ARE NO LONGER EXCESSIVE
AND THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS SITUATION PARTICULARLY ON
CURRENT ACCOUNT IS STRENGTHENING. WE ARE SEEING THE
FIRST REAL SIGNS OF RECOVERY IN EMPLOYMENT. WITH THE
LARGE PERSONAL TAX CUTS, INCLUDING THE HOUSING INTEREST
DEDUCTIBILITY SCHEME NOW BEING REFLECTED IN PAY PACKETS,
DISPOSABLE INCOMES ARE RISING STRONGLY.
THIS FOUNDATION FOR RECOVERY HAS BEEN ACHIEVED BY
NEW MEASURES TAKEN SINCE THE BUDGET. INEVITABLY THE RiTIMATES
OF EXPENDITURE AND RECEIPTS CONTAINED IN THE BUDGET HAVE
BEEN AMENDED. WE MAKE NO APOLOGY FOR THAT, JUST AS'WE MAKE
NO APOLOGY FOR THE POST-BUDGET MEASURES THEMSELVES, THE
INCREASED ESTIMATED DEFICIT IS THE NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE OF
THOSE MEASURES. THE BUDGET ITSELF WAS CRITICISED LAST
SEPTEMBER AS BEING TOO EXPANSIONARY. WITH HINDSIGHT, WE
CAN SEE THAT IT WAS NOT EXPANSIONARY ENOUGH. 
THAT DEFICIENCY HAS SUBSEQUENTLY BEEN CORRECTED. THE
DEFICIT IS NOW ESTIMATED AS MOST LIKELY TO BE OF THE
ORDER OF $ 2,300 MILLION WITH A DOMESTIC DEFICIT OF ABOUT
$ 1,660 MILLION. THAT DEFICIT HAS TO BE PUT IN THE
PERSPECTIVE OF THE SEPARATE ITEMS WHICH COMPOSE IT. THE
CRY NOW IS THAT GOVERNMENT SPENDING MUST BE CUT. THE
FACT IS THAT THE REALLY BIG ITEMS WHERE SPENDING HAS BEEN
INCREASED. MOST, COMPARED WITH THE BUDGET ESTIMATE, ARE
PRECISELY THOSE WHICH ARE CONTRIBUTING MOST TO THE
RECOVERY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
LET US LOOK AT THE DETAILS. LET THE OPPOSITION
DECLARE THAT IT WOULD CUT SPENDING ON THESE ITEMS. HIGHFLOWN
GENERALISATIONS ABOUT GOVERNMENT SPENDING ARE NOT
ENOUGH. SPENDING ON SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE IS UP
$ 210 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATE. WOULD THE OPPOSITION
* DENY THE CORRECTNESS OF OUR PENSIONS INCREASE BOTH IN
HUMAN TERMS AND ECONOMIC TERMS? SPENDING ON HOUSING IS UP
$ 234 MILLIONS. DOES THE OPPOSITION CLAIM THAT THIS IS
ILL-DIRECTED EITHER SOCIALLY OR ECONOMICALLY? 115/ 8 
ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY IS UP $ 377 MILLION ON
THE BUDGET ESTIMATE. DOES THE COUNTRY PARTY DEPLORE
OUR ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRIES OR THE LIBERAL PARTY
DENOUNCE OUR ASSISTANCE TO PRIVATE INDUSTRY?
PAYMENTS TO THE STATES AND FOR NATURAL DISASTER
RELIEF ARE UP $ 224 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATE.
IS THIS, INCLUDING DARWIN RELIEF, AN. AREA WHERE THE
OPPOSITION WOULD CUT GOVERNMENT SPENDING?
EDUCATION IS UP $ 103 MILLION, IS THIS WHERE THE
CUT SHOULD BE MADE?
DEFENCE SPENDING IS UP $ 142 MILLION. SHOULD WE
HAVE PARED HERE? 6/. 
-6-
THERE IS OF COURSE ONE AREA OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING
-READILY IDENTIFIABLE, READILY MARKED FOR THE AXE. THAT
IS THE SPENDING INVOLVED IN THE NEW PROGRAMS INSTITUTED BY
THIS GOVERNMENT WHICH ARE DESIGNED TO BENEFIT THOSE
AUSTRALIANS WHO HAVE THE LEAST POLITICAL LEVERAGE, THEY
ARE PROGRAMS WHICH ARE POLITICALLY DISPENSABLE BECAUSE
THEIR BENEFICIARIES ARE POLITICALLY EXPENDABLE, THERE IS
A READY-MADE LIST OF EXPENDABLE PROGRAMS THE PROGRAMS
IMPERILLED BY THE HG1H COURT CHALLENGE ON THE
CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, ALL THESE
PROGRAMS BENEFIT THE RELATIVELY INARTICULATE OR
UNDER-PRIVILEGED IN OUR COMMUNITY, THEY HAVE A SOCIAL AND
HUMAN VALUE FAR BEYOND THEIR FINANCIAL COST, IN ITSELF
RELATIVELY SMALL COMPARED TO THE GREAT TRADITIONAL AREAS OF
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, To CUT THEM WOULD HAVE NO SIGNIFICANT
ECONOMIC EFFECT BUT IT WOULD MAKE A GESTURE IN THE
DIRECTION OF THOSE DEMANDING CUTS IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING,
THAT LOBBY IS VOCAL AND WELL ORGANISED; THE AUSTRALIANS
WHO BENEFIT UNDER THESE PROGRAMS ARE NEITHER, I SUGGEST
IT IS UPON THESE PROGRAMS AND UPON THOSE WHO BENEFIT FROM
THEM THAT THE-OPPOSITION WOULD REALLY LIKE TO SEE THE
GREAT AXE FALL, 
-7-
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE LEDGER RECEIPTS ARE
DOWN BY $ 307 MILLION ON THE BUDGET ESTIMATES. WHY?
BECAUSE OF TAX CUTS ADDITIONAL TO THOSE MADE IN THE
BUDGET. WE HAVE FOREGONE A FURTHER $ 230 MILLION NET
IN REVENUE FROM PERSONAL TAXATION AND $ 105 MILLION IN
COMPANY TAXATION. DOES THE OPPOSITION 1 EJECT THESE
CONCESSIONS?* SHOULD WE HAVE INCREASED TAXATION TO
REDUCE THE DEFICIT? SHOULD WE HAVE INCREASED TAXATION
TO SATISFY THE DOGMA-THAT DEFICIT BUDGETING IS' INTRINSICALILY
IRRESPONSIBLE? IF OPPOSITION SPOKESMEN WILL SPECIFY ONE AREA WHERE
A SUBSTANTIAL REDUCTION IN SPENDING SHOULD HAVE BEEN
MADE EITHER ON THE GROUNDS OF ECONOMIC PRUDENCE OR SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY THEN WE MIGHT TAKE MORE SER IOUSLY THEIR
FOR REDUCED GOVERNMENT SPENDING,. YET. PRATHER THAN
DO THIS THEIR COMPLAINTS ON SPECIFIC ISSU ES IMPLY NOT 4
REDUCED'GOVERNMENT SPENDING BUT INCREASED GOVERNMENT
SPENDING. WHAT ELSE* IS THE CONSEQUENCE OF THE DEMANDS BY
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION FOR INCREASED DEFENCE SPENDING.
OR BY THE LEADER OF THE COUNTRY PARTY FOR EVEN MORE
GENEROUS ASSISTANCE TO RURAL INDUSTRY THAN WE ARE ALREADY
PROVIDING. THE FACT IS THAT THE AREAS WHERE WE HAVE
INCREASED EXPENDITURE OR FOREGONE REVENUE ARE ALL SOCIALLY
ESSENTIAL AND IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH THEY WERE MADE
ECONOMICALLY CORRECT. THEf EXPANSION UPON THE SEPTEMBER
BUDGET HAS BEEN THE CORRECT COURSE FOR THE CIRCUMSTANCES
UNDER WHICH IT WAS UNDERTAKEN. 188/. 
WE HAVE THUS ACHIEVED NOT FULL RECOVERY BUT THE
CHANCE FOR FULL REVOVERY, THE OPPORTUNITY HAS BEEN
HARD-WON, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT LIKE ALL RESPONSIBLE
GOVERNMENTS IN COMPARABLE COUNTRIES HAS HAD TO MAKE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS AND THERE WILL BE A CONTINUING NEED FOR MORE
DIFFICULT DECISIONS; BUT THE IMPORTANTTHING IS THAT THE
OPPORTUNITY ALL AUSTRALIANS HAVE EARNED SHOULD NOT BE LOST.
THE FACT REMAINS THAT IN 1975 THE REAL DANGER OF A RESURGENCE
OF THE RATE OF INFLATION AND THE REAL DANGER OF A DOWN-TURN
IN EMPLOYMENT WOULD COME FROM WAGE DEMANDS, GREATER THAN
THE ABILITY OF THE ECONQMY TO ABSORB, THIS IS THE REAL
MESSAGE THAT THE TREASURER AND I HAVE TRIED TO CONVEY TO
EMPLOYEES AND THEIR ORGANISATIONS1 THE WHOLE OBJECT OF
THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX CUTS, OF OUR SUPPORT FOR WAGE
INDEXATION AND THE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS WE HAVE
ACHIEVED IN THE PROVISION OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, PUBLIC
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNITY SERVICES HAS BEEN TO SUSTAIN ANDI
RAISE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIVING OF FAMILIES BEYOND THAT
PROVIDED BY THE PAY-PACKET ALONE, OUR'OBJECT IS TO REDUCE
. THE NEED FOR VAST WAGE INCREASES WHICH INDIVIDUALS AND
FAMILIES FEEL OBLIGED TO DEMAND IN ORDER TO CHASE RISING.
PRICES AND'MAINTAIN THEIR LIVING STANDARDS. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IT IS THE MORE ENTITLED TO
EXPECT CO-OPERATION INSOFAR AS WE HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
OUR EFFORTS TO RAISE REAL STANDARDS AND REAL EARNINGS FOR
AUSTRALIAN-EMPLOYEES, THAT IS FOR THE VAST MAJORITY OF
AUSTRALIANS. ,19/, 
-9-
INCOMES OF WAGE AND SALARY EARNERS HAVE GROWN
CONSISTENTLY FASTER THAN THE COST OF LIVING SINCE
DECEMBER 1972. BETWEEN THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1972 AND
THE DECEMBER QUARTER 1974:-
THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX INCREASED BY
31.6 PER CENT,
AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS INCREASED BY
46.8 PER CENT TO $ 146.90,
SAVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY AWARD WAGE RATES
FOR MALES INCREASED BY 53 PER CENT TO
$ 104 PER WEEK,
AVERAGE MINIMUM WEEKLY AWARD WAGE RATES
FOR FEMALES INCREASED BY 75 PER CENT TO
$ 91 PER WEEK.
REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, BEFORE TAX,'
INCREASED BY 11.5 PER CENT. 0
REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, AFTER TAX,
INCREASED BY 7.3 PER CENT. 
THESE FIGURES FURTHER POINT TO THE BASIC STRENGTH
OF THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY AND THE SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE
-OF OUR NATIONAL POLICIES IN MEETING THE INTERNATIONAL
PROBLEMS OF THE WORLD ECONOMY. ISHALL GIVE SOME* KEY
COMPARISONS: -WHEREAS IN AUSTRALIA.. REAL AVERAGE WEEKLY
EARNINGS BEFORE TAX-INCREASED BY 11.5 PER CENT
JN THE TWO YEARS DECEMBER 1972 DECEMBER 1974,
IN THE U. S. THERE WAS A DECLINE OF 5.8 PER CENT&amp;
-IN THE CALENDAR YEAR 1974, AUSTRALIAN GROSS
DOMESTIC* PRODUCT GREW BY 1.7 PER CENT IN REAL
TERMS COMPARED WITH THE PRECEDING CALENDAR
YEAR 1973. IN THE SAME PERIOD THERE WAS A
DECLINE IN THE U. S. OF 2.2 PER CENT; IN JAPAN
OF 3.7 PER CENT AND IN GREAT BRITAIN OF 0.2 PER CENT.
IN WEST GERMANY THERE WAS A' MARGINAL INCREASE OF'
0.4 PER CENT.-IN THE OECD NATIONS AS A WHOLE
THERE WAS A DECLINE OF 0.3 PER CENT IN REAL
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT.
THERE IS NO SUGGESTION IN ALL THIS THAT THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS COMPLACENT, BUT THE FIGURES DO SUGGEST THAT
CONFIDENCE IN THE AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY IS WELL FOUNDED. THE
KEY TO ECONOMIC REVIVAL THI. S YEAR IS THE'REVIVAL OF
CONFIDENCE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR. THE MEASURES TAKEN BY
THE GOVERNMENT. IN THE PAST NINE MONTHS ESTABLISH A GOOD
BASIS FOR THAT CONFIDENCE. 11/. 
-1-
IN'SEPTEMBER, NOVEMBER AND JANUARY, WE TOOK MEASURES
APPROPRIATE FOR EXISTING AND EMERGING CONDITIONS. WE
SHALL CONTINUE THAT APPROACH, THE APPROACH OF A
RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT RESPONSIVE TO THE
NEEDS OF THE ECONOMY, RESPONSIVE TO THE NEEDS OF ALL
SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY, RESPONSIBLE IN MAKING THE
DECISIONS TO. MEET THOSE NEEDS, 



PRIME MINISTER's SPEECH AT SAN NICOLA BALL, PERTH
19 APRIL, 1975
Thank you very much indeed for the very kind words that
you have used about me and my wife. It is a very great
pleasure again to be guests of the Association of San Nicola
at the Annual Ball.
The last time I was your guest was three years ago and on
that occasion I remember undertaking that if I was translated
from Leader of the Opposition to Prime Minister, I would see
that people who had migrated to Australia, were placed in
as good a position as people who-had always lived in Australia.
In particular,' I remember promising that if anybody in
Australia had-an age, or an invalid or a widow's pension,
then he or she would be able to continue to receive that
pension wherever he or she went to live in the world.
That is, you wouldn't lose the pension if. you left the
country. You earned it, you received it.
Now I realise that it will be a long, long time before any
of you are interested in pensions. But, nevertheless, it
was something that we were able to carry out.
There were some other things we wanted to do for migrants.
We were not satisfied that the interest, the respondibility
of the Federal Government for migrants, ceased when they
arrived in Australia. We wanted to see that when people
came to Australia, they would be happy to remain here, they
would be happy to become citizens and they themselves would
prove the Very best advocates for other people to come to
Australia. We didn't think it was good enough for the
Government always to be looking for migrants. The best
people to persuade migrants to come to Australia, were
people who themselves had migrated to Australia and had
found it a good place to live.
It has given my colleagues and me, the very greatest
satisfaction that the number of people being naturalised
in Australia, is almost double what it was three years ago
and the number of people leaving Australia, is only half
as many as it was three years ago.
To give you an indication in this city of what we have
tried to do. Quite early in the peace, in February, 1973,
we established a migrant education centre in Wapet House,
in St. Georges Terrace. This was to make it easy for people 
to learn English if they wanted to. There are other things
which are being done to see that people at work, or women
at home, are able to learn English easily.
To take something more recently In March last year, we
established in Perth the telephone interpreter service,
which means that anybody who is not familiar with English,
is able to ring up the telephone interpreter service and
seek advice about his problems. The Department of Social
Security in Perth now has people, welfare officers, on its
staff, who can speak Italian. Of course, there are others
who can speak other languages as well. I emphasise Italians
because they are the people who have come to Australia in
greatest numbers after the British and the Irish. Of all
the people who have come to settle in Australia, the British
are the most numerous, the Irish are the next, and the Italians
are third.
The last census in June, 1971, showed that at that time,
there were 289,000 people living in Australia who had been
born in Italy.. Moreover, there have been 160,000 Italian
citizens who have been naturalised as Australians in Australia
so far. It is a remarkable record. The number of people who
have come here and the number of people, who coming here,
have decided to become Australians.
In Western Australia, in particular, Italians came earliest
arnidg hti n frthoem tghree atbeesgti nnniunmgbe rosfu . E urTohepreea n wesreet, t leofm encto urisne , A usIttraalliiaan. s
There was-an Italian in the First Fleet that Captain Phillip
took to Sydney, and there some in the Gold Rush, of course,
later on in Victoria and New South Wales. But until abouta
or 40 years ago, the greatest percentage of Italia-lis in
any of the States was in Perth, Western Australia. Most
in Perth, but of course, there were gold miners and there
were timber getters and so on in the country as well. There
is no doubt that Italians have felt that Australia is one of
the most attractive countries to go. There are very few
countries in the world to which Italians have gone in such
miurbers. I believe it is true to say, there is no country.
in the world where Italians have felt so much at home and
have been so successful.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we want you to be happy here. We
want you to be the great advocates * for other people to come
to Australia, because people are happiest in Australia, if
they already have friends and relatives who are happily
established here. 
S 3.
We have made it easier to become citizens. The same conditions
apply to people from all parts of the world who want to be
citizens. There are the same qualifications, the same period,
three years required, and we have made all the conditions easier.
Some of the things which used to be done to discriminate against
migrants, have been abolished. It used to be possible, for
instance, for anybody who had fallen foul of the law, to be
deported if he was a migrant. That is no longer possible.
There are no double penalties. There is no discrimination.
We have set up in each State, committees, task forces, to make
sure that there is no discrimination against any migrants, any
particular community within the whole community. In this State,
that task force is chaired by my colleague, Mr. Jo Berenson,
the M. P. for Perth.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a very great
pleasure once again to be your guest. I am happy to be able
to come to you and say that I carried out the promises that
I made the last time I was your guest. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF CURTIN HOUSE,
PERTH APRIL, 1975
Mr. dhairman, Mr. and Mrs. McLeod, Mr. and Mrs. John Curtin,
Jnr., Sir Paul and Lady Hasluck, Mr. and Mrs. John Tonkin,
Ladies and Gentlemen
A year ago on the eve of the campaign for the 1974 Federal
elections, I laid the foundation stone for John Curtin House
in Canberra. That building, now nearing completion, will be
the national headquarters of the Australian Labor Party.
Today, 2,000 miles across the continent, I have the privilege
of officially opening Curtin House as the headquarters of
the Western Australian branch of the Australian Labor Party.
So, in the national capital, where John Curtin lived and
worked as the Party's Leader and Australia's Prime Minister,
in the city where he died truly on active service and in
this western capital, near his home, his family's home,
his chosen resting place, in these two capitals, the Australian
Labor Party associates his name and memory with its continuing
and livin g work. By so doing, we do not so much honour an
imperishable name which requires no memorial in stone, but
rather dignify ourselves and our Party by being able to
associate our work with that name. He would have been
delighted to think that the work which will go on in this
building, in this site, should be associated with his name.
We are all sorry that Mrs. Elsie Curtin can' t be here. I'm
sure we are all thinking of her because on Tuesday, it will
be her 58th wedding anniversary. I know, because it will be
my 33rd wedding anniversary on. Tuesday. A few years ago,
Mrs. Curtin wrote to Margaret and me and pointed out that
our wedding took place on their 25th anniversary.
The name of these two headquarters in Canberra, in Perth,
symbolises John Curtin's commanding place in the history
of our Party and expresses our recognition of that place.
But in proclaiming him as our chief of men, we also acknowledge
a higher claim for while being our. Leader, he was the Leader
of the Nation. The circumstances of the time, his position
as Prime Minister of a Nation at war and his. own qualities,
made him pre-eminently the authentic leader of the Nation. 
Yet for John Curtin there was no contradiction in his
* role as Party Leader and as the Nation's Leader, nor is
there any contradiction in the honour which we as Party
members pay him as our Party Leader and the honour which
we ds Australians pay him, as our Nation's Leader. Indeed,
in John Curtin's case, his service to the Party was a crucial
and decisive part of his service to the Nation. The intimate
relationship between the two roles has been finely perceived
and is finely expressed by Sir Paul Hasluck who, with his
wife, honours us with their presence today.
On the 25th anniversary of the Pacific victory, which John
Curtin did not live to see, nearly five years ago, Sir Paul
unveiled a memorial at the civic centre, Cottesloe. He
spoke not only as Australia's Governor-General at that time,
but as a frieno, a fellow journalist and a public servant
under John Curtin.
Let me repeat here at the opening of Curtin House in Perth,
what I quoted at the laying of the foundation stone a year
ago in Canberra at John Curtin House. Sir Paul said this on
that occasion at Cottesloe nearly five years ago:
" In 1935 he was elected to the Leadership of the
Parliamentary Labor Party. This decision of Caucus
was one fateful both . for the Party and for the
Nation. When Curtin became Leader, the Party was
dis-united and divided. He lifted it away from.
its divisions and its failures and helped it to
re-discover some central purpose, even if he
couldn't at once remove all of the more deepseated
differences. In doing so, he made the
Labor Party fit to govern and gave the Nation
the alternative Government which under our
democratic usage, was required once the formation
of a war time National Government was found to
be politically impossible. If he had not succeeded
so well in the years between 1935 and 1940, there
would not have been a viable alternative Government
at the critical point in 1941 when one had to be
found.-As Leader of the alternative Government,
he found himself Prime Minister, largely as the
result of the sound, useful work he had done as
a Party Leader in restoring the health of his
own Party. He accepted office as the destiny
of the Party." 
3.
This generous tribute is all the more valuable coming as
it does from one who could speak, not only as a public
servant, an historian, a statesman, but as one throughout
his own long and distinguished political career was a good
Party man, an honourable partisan. Both his tribute to
John Curtin and his own career illustrated one of the great
truths of our democratic system. The strength of the system
depends upon the strength of the two great opposing Parties.
In our parliamentary democracy, partisanship, honourable
partisanship, is not seldom the highest patriotism. Democracy
in Britain and Australia faced the supreme physical test for
survival in the war during which John Curtin was our Leader.
In our own time, when democracy everywhere faces tests and
challenges of a very different kind, it's strength and survival,
rests, I believe, on the strength of the two Party system.
John Curtin not only re-built a broken Party, he not only
restored the Party's confidence in itself, he restored its
confidence in the idea of leadership. He gave it confidence
to lead the Nation by giving it confidence in him as its
Leader. This was the essence of his contribution to the
future of the. Australian Labor Party.
For a generation and more after the great catastrophe of the
First World War, the Australian Labor Party lost faith in the
very concept of leadership. John Curtin restored it. Not, of
course, in any sense of an imposed dictatorship, or unchallenged,
unquestioning authority, but in the sense that the leadership
must provide coherence and cohesion to the Party and its
programme. Curtin's success in re-establishing that trust
as Leader, has left the Party as a whole, in his debt and
equally has left all his successors in his deep debt.
I am proud to acknowledge my own debt to him as his successor,
as Leader of the Australian Labor Party, as his successor as
Prime Minister of Australia.
Ladies and Gentlemen, with John Tonkin, I now unveil the plaque
to commemorate the official opening of Curtin House, the
headquarters of the Western Australian branch of the Australian
Labor Party. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW CIVIC CHAMBERS AT QUEANBEYAN
MONDAY,. 21 APRIL, .1975
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:
THANK YOU FOR INVITING ME TO OPEN TONIGHT QUEANBEYAN'S
NEW COUNCIL CHAMBERS AND BABY HEALTH CENTRES YOU WILL KNOW
THAT I AM NO STRANGER TO QUEANBEYAN HAVING ATTENDED MANY
FUNCTIONS HERE AND HAVING HELD MAJOR CAMPAIGN MEETINGS HERE
IN 1972 AND 1974X THIS OCCASION AFFORDS ME AN OPPORTUNITY
TO RECALL COMMENTS AND COMMITMENTS I MADE AT THOSE CAMPAIGN
MEETINGS AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO DEMONSTRATE HOW MOST OF THAT
PROMISED HAS'BEEN ACHIEVEDX I CHOSE QUEANBEYAN FOR THOSE
CAMPAIGN MEETINGS AND SPOKE ABOUT THE PROBLEMS OF THE CITIES
AND MY GOVERNMENT' S PLANS FOR IMPROVING THEM BECAUSE I
BELIEVED THAT QUEANBEYAN REPRESENTS, IN MICROCOSM, OUR GREAT
CITIES AND THEIR PROBLEMSX
QUEANBEYAN, LIKE THE CITIES OF SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE,
GROWS AT'SUCH A RATE THAT ITS RESOURCES ARE NOT ADEQUATE TO
MEET THE SERVICES DEMAND WHICH ITS GROWTH CREATESX YOUR"
GROWTH OF 5.5 PER CENT PER ANNUM IS CAUSED BY FACTORS NOT
OF YOUR MAKING OR CONTROLX YOU HAVE A BACKLOG IN THE
PROVISION AND EXTENSION OF SERVICES WHICH COMMUNITIES
RIGHTLY EXPECTX YOUR INCOME IS BARELY SUFFICIENT FOR ALL
YOUR NEEDSX LOAN SERVICING PLACESA GREAT BURDEN UPON THE
STRUCTURE OF YOUR FINANCING AND AS WITH OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS IN THE CITIES OF THIS NATION, YOU MUST COMPETE
WITH SISTER ORGANISATIONS IN THE SEMI-GOVERNMENT LOAN MARKET
FOR THE SAME LIMITED SUPPLY OF FUNDSX s @ 2/ s 
-2-
IN THE POLICY SPEECH WHICH I DELIVERED ON BEHALF
OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY FOR THE ELECTIONS OF 1972
I SAID: " OUR PROGRAM HAS THREE GREAT AIMS. THEY ARE:
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY
TO INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR LAND; AND
TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE
HORIZONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE."
BUT I ALSO SAID IN SPEAKING SPECIFICALLY OF THE
CITIES OF THIS NATION:
" INCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING,
THE HEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY1 HIS
CHILDREN'IS OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND
SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HIS ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO ENJOY THE NATION'IS
RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND. CULTURE, HIS ABILITY
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DECISIONS AND. ACTIONS OF THE
COMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT BY
THE HOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVES, THIS
IS WHY LABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST INVOLVE ITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES." 3/. 
-3-
BY THE PURSUIT OF THE SECOND AIM WHICH I ASSERTED
IN 1972 TO INVOLVE THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN THE
DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES OF OUR NATION MUCH OF OUR PROGRAM
FOR THE CITIES WAS DETERMINED BUT WE ALSO WANTED PUBLIC
PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF POLICY, ALL THE PROGRAMS UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, HOWEVER, HAVE MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF
INVOLVEMENT BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE
SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND WELFARE THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN
ACCEPTED IN AUSTRALIA, THE UNDERLYING PHILOSOPHY IS THIS:
IN MODERN COMMUNITIES EVEN THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNOT
PROVIDE ITS MEMBERS WITH THE BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST
MEDICAL TREATMENT, THE BEST ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE
COMMUNITY, INCREASINGLY, THE BASIC SERVICES AND
OPPORTUNITIES WHICH DETERMINE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIFE OF
A FAMILY OR INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY
AND ONLY TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE COMMUNITY IS WILLING TO
PROVIDE THEM, EITHER THE COMMUNITY PROVIDES THEM OR THEY
WILL NOT BE PROVIDED AT ALL, IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONTEXT
THIS MEANS THAT THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT,
MUST FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE FINANCED AT ALL.
.14/, 
-4-
OBVIOUSLY THEN OUR PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR, OR RATHER
POSITIVELY REQUIRE, A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND INITIATIVE
BY-LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AND BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE
COMMUNITY. IN ALL OF THIS, WE HAVE FORGED A NEW PARTNERSHIP.-
A PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S POLICIES.
IN QUEANBEYAN, NO LESS THAN IN OUR GREAT CITIES OF
WHICH IT IS A MICROCOSM, THIS PARTNERSHIP HAS BEEN EVIDENT.
THERE-ARE MANY EXAMPLES OF HOW WE HAVE TRIED TO ACHIEVE THIS'
PARTNERSHIP, THIS COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION, THROUGH COMMUNITY
ACTION IN DECISION-MAKING AND POLICY IMPLEMENTATION. SOME
OF THESE ARE: AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION
THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM
AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS
THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
IN MOST OF THESE EXAMPLES WHICH I MENTION, YOUR COMMUNITY
HAS PARTICIPATED, BUT IN YOUR CASE, THERE ARE OTHER EXAMPLES
OF PARTICIPATION OR ACTION BY MY GOVERNMENT WHICH ARE NOT
REPEATED ON A NATIONAL SCALE. LET ME MENTION HERE THE
AREAS IN WHICH WE ARE IN PARTNERSHIP, THAT IS, YOUR COMMUNITY
OF QUEANBEYAN AND MY GOVERNMENT WORKING TOGETHER IN WHATI
CALL THE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM. a a 
UNDER THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM A $ 120,000
GRANT MADE UP OF $ 70,000 FOR THE FIRST STAGE OF A
COMMUNITY COMPLEX. $ 32,000 FOR CLEARANCE OF THE
QUEANBEYAN RIVER AND ITS BANKS, $ 8,000 FOR
INVESTIGATION OF CONSTRUCTION OF AN ADDITIONAL
WEIR, AND $ 10,000 FOR A TREE PLANTING PROGRAM.
UNDER THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION PROGRAM $ 9,926
FOR THE HARRIS PARK PRE-SCHOOL AND $ 9,449 FOR THE
SOUTH QUEANBEYAN PRE-SCHOOL FOR RECURRENT EXPENDITURE
DURING THE PERIOD 1.1.74 31.3.75.
UNDER THEMIGRANT EDUCATION PROGRAMS $ 67,000 THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR FOR MIGRANT CHILDREN EDUCATION.
UNDER THE SCHOOLS COMMISSION PROGRAMS $ 22,870 THIS
FINANCIAL YEAR AND IN ADDITION, $ 9,696 TO TEACHERS
AND SCHOOLS IN YOUR CITY FOR EDUCATIONAL INNOVATIONS1
UNDER AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION DEPARTMENT PROGRAMS FOR
THE PERIOD 1.1.73 11.4.75 $ 53,620,
UNDER THE HOSPITALS PROGRAM -, THE ACCELERATION OF
WORK AT THE QUEANBEYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL BECAUSE
OF THE GRANT OF $ 8.83 MILLION TO NSW FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
AND IMPROVEMENT OF HOSPITALS.
UNDER THE HOME NURSING SUBSIDY SCHEME $ 19,512 FOR THE
QUEANBEYAN DISTRICT HOSPITAL DURING 1973 TO 1975. 
-6-
FROM THE GRANTS COMMISSION $ 80,000.
FOR FLOOD RELIEF ASSISTANCE AS PART OF
THE GRANT TO THE N. S. W. GOVERNMENT QUEANBEYAN
RECEIVED ASSISTANCE TO RELIEVE MAJOR FLOOD
DAMAGE IN 1974.
UNDER THE RURAL ARTERIAL ROADS PROGRAM
TOGETHER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF N. S. W,,
$ 159,000 FOR THE QUEANBEYAN RIVER BRIDGE;
$ 130,000 FOR THE APPROACHES TO THAT BRIDGE
AND $ 5,000 FOR THE COMMENCEMENT OF WORK ON
THE RAILWAY BRIDGE ON CANBERRA AVENUE.
As WELL, $ 10,781 WAS PROVIDED TO YOUR CITY
COUNCIL THIS FINANCIAL YEAR FOR RURAL LOCAL
ROADS. FOR A NEW CANBERRA-QUEANBEYAN RAILWAY BRIDGE
HALF THE COST OF CONSTRUCTION.
UNDER THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM $ 110,000
FOR AUGMENTATION OF THE QUEANBEYAN SEWERAGE WORKS
AND PUMPING STATION.
UNDER THE AGED PERSONS WELFARE PROGRAM $ 52,000
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE J. C. GORMAN MEMORIAL
CENTRE AND $ 50,112 FOR A SENIOR CITIZENS CENTRE.
AND, 
-7-
UNDER THE DEPT OF TOURISM RECREATION'S AREA
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM $ 80,000 FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF TIPTOP PARK,
BUT SUCH A LIST DOES NOT DO FULL JUSTICE TO THE
EXTENSIVE RANGE OF MATTERS IN WHICH WE CO-OPERATE. FOR
EXAMPLE, THERE IS CO-OPERATION BETWEEN US IN REGIONAL
PLANNING, IN WATER SUPPLY, IN TRANSPORT TO AND THROUGH
QUEANBEYAN TO CANBERRA, AND IN ASSISTANCE TO YOUR CITY
BY THE NC; D. C. IN LOCAL. PLANNING. PERHAPS THE BEST
EXAMPLE, HOWEVER, OF OUR PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM AND OF YOUR
INVOLVEMENT IN POLICY-MAKING AND IMPLEMENTATION, IS YOUR
PARTICIPATION IN 1973 IN THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT SYMPOSIUM,
CONCEIVED BY BOB WHAN, AND SPONSORED BY MY GOVERNMENT,
THAT SYMPOSIUM CONSIDERED THE PROBLEMS OF THE REGION AND
PRODUCED MATERIAL WHICH OUR PLANNERS CAN USE IN THE
CONSIDERATION OF PLANS FOR THE WHOLE SOUTH-EASTERN REGION. ' 4
I SHOULD, HOWEVER, ADD A WARNING. ALL THESE PROGRAMS
I HAVE MENTIONED ARE NOVEL FOR AUSTRALIA AND EXPERIMENTAL IN
AUSTRALIA. BECAUSE THEY ARE NEW, BECAUSE THEY ARETENTATIVE,
THEY LACK THE POLITICAL CLOUT THAT COMES FROM
YEARS AND YEARS OF EXPERIENCE AND EXPERTISE. BECAUSE THEY
SEEK OUT NEW AND NEGLECTED AREAS OF NEED, THEY MAY BE
REGARDED AS POLITICALLY PERIPHERAL, THEY HAVE NOT HAD THE
TIME TO BECOME SACRED COWS, BECAUSE THEY ARE DESIGNED TO
SERVE THE NEEDS OF THE WEAKEST, OF THE LEAST ARTICULATE MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY, AND BECAUSE THEY INVOLVE COMMUNITIES AND
INDIVIDUALS AT A LOCAL LEVEL, THEY MAY BE REGARDED AS
POLITICALLY DISPENSABLE BY THE OPPOSITION AND BY STATE
GOVERNMENTS. 
MY GOVERNMENT'S VIEW THOUGH IS STILL AS I STATED IT IN
MY POLICY SPEECH OF 1972:-
" WE ARE DETERMINED THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
SHALL BE RESTORED TO THEIR RIGHTFUL PLACE IN
THEIR OWN COUNTRY AS PARTICIPANTS AND
PARTNERS IN GOVERNMENT...". S
8/. 
-8-
LET THERE BE NO MISTAKE ABOUT THIS POSSIBILITY.
OUR OPPONENTS HAVE ALREADY GIVEN NOTICE OF THEIR
INTENTIONS. THEY CRY " CENTRALISM", " SOCIALISM"
AND " BUREAUCRAT ISAT ION" WHENEVER WE PRESS AHEAD WITH
ANY OF OUR POLICY COMMITMENTS. THEY FEAR THAT
UNFEELING PUBLIC SERVANTS IN CANBERRA AND PUBLIC
SERVANTS IN CANBERRA, AS WE ALL KNOW, ARE ALWAYS
UNFEELING WILL DESTROY COMMUNITY INITIATIVE. I
MAINTAIN THE CONTRARY THAT OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY
PROGRAMS WILL REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM
WITH GENUINE REGIONAL INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION$
As PROOF OF THEIR INTENTIONS, WE NEED LOOK
NO FURTHER THAN THEIR ACTIONS. THEY OPPOSED OUR
REFERENDUM BY WHICH LOCAL GOVERNMENT WOULD HAVE GAINED
REPRESENTATION ON THE LOAN COUNCIL AND, TWO OF THE
PROGRAMS I HAVE MENTIONED THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEMEARE
BEING CHALLENGED BY SOME OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
IN THE HIGH COURT$
IF THAT CHALLENGE SHOULD SUCCEED, NO LESS
THAN FIFTY-SEVEN NATIONAL WELFARE PROGRAMS, SOME OF
THEM INITIATED BY THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT, COULD BE
IMPERILLED. FOR EXAMPLE, PROGRAMS FOR THE AGED AND
HOMELESS, THE HANDICAPPED, ABORIGINAL PEOPLE, ISOLATED
CHILDREN, HEALTH CENTRES, LEGAL AID OFFICES, NURSING
HOMES AND HOME NURSING, MEALS ON WHEELS, THE FLYING
DOCTOR SERVICE, AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION. 84 1/ 9 
THE COMMON DISTINGUISHING FACTOR IN ALL THESE PROGRAMS
IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS OF
THE-WEAK AND INARTICULATE SECTIONS OF THE COMMUNITY.
IF THESE GROUPS WERE POLITICALLY POWERFUL, IF THEY
COULD MOUNT EFFECTIVE POLITICAL PRESSURE, THE
GOVERNMENTS WHICH DARED TO PLACE THESE PROGRAMS IN
JEOPARDY WOULD BE DESTROYED. BUT AS IT IS, THE THING
PASSES OFF WITH SCARCE A MURMUR.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: YOUR CITY, YOUR
COMMUNITY ESPECIALLY THE NEEDY, WEAK AND INARTICULATE
MEMBERS OF IT HAVE BEEN MUCH ASSISTED BY OUR JOINT
EFFORTS, BY OUR PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM. WE MUST ENSURE
THAT THERE IS NO GOING BACK, THAT COOPERATIVE
INVOLVEMENT IN, AND ASSISTANCE TO, THE COMMUNITIES
OF AUSTRALIA BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT BECOMES
ESTABLISHED. IT IS THE RIGHT OF EACH COMMUNITY AND
OF EACH INDIVIDUAL IN IT. WE SHOULD BE SATISFIED WITH
NO LESS THAN THIS. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. OF AUSTRALIA,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TOWN HALL, LIMA PERU 25 APRIL 1975
Thank you Mr Mayor, for the honour you have
done me and all Australians in this ceremony today.
It is surely one of the curiosities of history that
while an Australian Prime Minister was born in South
America, this is the first time an Australian Prime
Minister has paid a visit to the continent. Those
events are separated by 108 years. For the benefit of
Austr Alians who may have forgotten their history, I
remind them that John Watson, the youngest Prime
Minister to take office in Australia, and the first
Labor Prime Minister, was born in Valparaiso. So
I'm delighted that this is the first visit by an
Australian Head of Government to South America.
I'm delighted that my visit should begin in your
historic and beautiful city a city roughly the size
of Sydney, from which I departed three days ago. It is
fitting that these two cities, Sydney and Lima, and our
two countries countries with similar populations and
with many similar hopes and aspirations should be
participants in the first attempt by an Australian
Head of Government to establish direct and personal
links between continents and peoples on opposite shores
of the Pacific ocean.
This morning I laid a wreath at your
national shrine. Some of you may know that today is
also the anniversary of a battle with historic, indeed
sacred, significance in the minds of the Australian
people. Of course our military annals have little in
common, but I was reminded by this concurrence of
events of just how closely the histories of our two
countries are linked with Europe. Australia and Peru
were colonized by great European powers. Both retain,
in their languages, their customs, their histories,
the marks of their former but still continuing links
with European civilization. At the same time both are
the homes of much older indigenous cultures. During
my visit to your city, in particular, to your
archaeological museum and its magnificent collection,
I have seen evidence of the remarkable ancient
civilizations which flourished on the Peruvian coast.
In no city, in no region of the world, is there a
richer and more diverse conjunction of Christian
European and Pre-Christian cultures.-It has been
an unforgettable experience to see the architecture,
and many of the artifacts, of cultures as varied as
the Moche and the Mazca, the Paracas and the Inca
the Brillians and the splendour of whose works have been
rarely surpassed. / 2 
-2-
Like Sydney, Lima is a great Pacific port,
and yesterday, as we flew over the ocean that both joins
and divides us, I was reminded of the important part
the Pacific has played in our histories. It was from
this coast from here, from Callao, and a little
later from further. north, from Acapulco that man
first set out on his conquest of the Pacific. From
here the search for the great southern continent,
Australia Del Espiritu Santo, began nearly 400 years
ago. The Spanish mariners, of course, despite their
courageous voyages, were not the ones to find
Australia, but they went remarkably close. Torres
passed the northern tip of the continent in 1606 and
sailed through the strait which now bears his name.
Forty years earlier, Mendana embarked on a course which
would almost certainly have brought him to the east
coast of Australia in -the vicinity of Rockhampton.
He changed course, however, on the advice of his pilot
Gallego a decision which eventually led him to the
Solomon Islands and deprived him of the opportunity
of anticipating by some 200 years, Captain Cook's
discovery of Australia.
We might well speculate as indeed, many
have done on what would have happened if the Spanish
explorers from Peru had found Australia first. As
things turned out, our histories and development have
proceeded in almost total isolation from each other
during the intervening centuries. I believe the time
has come, the occasion has arrived, to explore once
again the opportu~ nities which lie across the Pacific,
on both sides of the Pacific. It is that belief, that
confidence, which has brought me to your city. Lima
for centuries the capital of most of South America,
is now the capital-of a nation with an important
contemporary role, not only in Latin America but in
world affairs. The second general conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organisation
was held in Lima this year. I congratulate your
Government on the success of that conference and the
significant contribution made by. Peru. It is
appropriate that the outcome of the conference the
declaration and plan of action on industrial
development and coooperation the Lima Declaration
bears the name of this city.
For two nations so long aind so far apart,
it is remarkable how many attitudes we share and how
closely we have worked together. Peru is a member
of the organisation of American states and the
Andean group, to both of which Australia has
observer status. We share an active concern for the
Third World and in particular the non-aligned
movement. We are both rich in natural resources and
our economies depend greatly on the development and
sale of those resources. / 3 
We were founding members of APEF, The organisation of
iron ore exporters. Australia has observer status at
CIPEF, the group of copper producing states a. nd
there is a prospect of further cooperation in silver.
Australia and Peru have almost identical views, as
coastal states, on the law of the sea. We were members
together of the Security Council in 1973 and 1974.
We are both signdtories of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty. Having flown to your city across the South
Pacific and experienced once again the serene beauty of
that vast ocean, I recall with pride the efforts of
Australia and other Pacific border states to resist the
poisoning of our seas and skies by nuclear tests.
Some twenty years ago, Mr Mayor, an
important street in Sydney was named General San Martin'
Drive to commemorate one of the heroes of your
independence struggle. Your country asserted her
political independence one and a half centuries ago.
In the past decade, and in the same sturdy spirit, she
has asserted her economic independence as well.
Australia's political independence was achieved more
recently and certainly more peacefully, but our quest
for economic independence, for the ownership and control
of our basic industries and resources, is still going
forward. Much has been achieved by Peru in working
towards this goal. Widely separated as we are from each
other and from many of the scenes of world conflict
and tension Australia and Peru can profit from each
other's example. As medium powers it is very much in
our interests to associate more often and more closely
to help shape a world whose future belongs to us as much
as it does to the mightiest of nations. That is the
true significance of our meeting the conviction
that smaller states, by winning new friends, by
developing new ideas and challenging old
assumptions, by promoting new alliances and new
perspectives in foreign relations, can be a force for
hope and progress in these dangerous and uncertain times.
I am deeply grateful for the hospitality
and warmth shown to me in your country and particularly
in Lima. In sealing, by this ceremony, the friendship
of the peoples of Peru and Australia, I believe we have
laid the basis for a productive and enduring association
between our countries, one that will lead to many
opportunities for useful cooperation and better
understanding in the promotion of a just and peaceful
world. 



Embargo : Sunday 5 pm
PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO. 6
DEFENCE
Sunday 27 April 1975
Since the recent unhappy turn of events in Indo-China
the Opposition parties in Canberra have been rubbing their
hands in glee in the belief that they can capitalise on a
supposed weakness in Australia's defences. They have fostered
the myth the damaging myth that our defences are neglected
and run-down. Of course, where defence matters are concerned,
I don't suppose we should take much notice of the men who
bungled the Flil deal and got us disastrously involved in
the war in Vietnam. But it's important that their latest
accusations be promptly nailed. Here in Queensland there
are more major d ! fence bases and installations than in any
other State. Defence is a natural concern to you. The fact
is that Australia's defences are strong and vigorous. We
have highly trained, well-equipped professional forces
better peacetime forces than-ever before.
And the important thing to remember is that under a
Labor Government our defences have been maintained without
conscription. One of the first things we did was abolish
the detested and inefficient call-up of Australia's youth.
We can take it that the Opposition don't object to that
decision because they have sinice told us after some
prompting that they wouldn't reintroduce conscription
themselves. So let's look at the figures that really matterthe
volunteer forces, the professional servicemen who are
making service life their career. In December 1972, when
the previous Government went out, the volunteer strength of
the three services was 69,195. Today it is actually a little
higher 69,200. And the increase we have authorised in the
army strength will take it from 31,500 to 34,000 by the end
of next year the biggest peacetime army Australia has ever
had. Or look at it in money terms. In the last full year
of Liberal-Country Party government, Australia was spending
$ 1217 million a year-on defence. This financial year we'll
be spending almost $ 1800 million the equivalent of $ 5 million
a day. We're not wasting that money on unhappy young conscripts.
We're spending it on the arms, the equipment, the professional
training that will make our defences as good as those of any
comparable country.
The Opposition make much of the Government's supposed
belief that Australia faces no threat for 10 or 15 years.
No one has ever said that an attack on Australia is impossible. 
We have concluded, on the basis of the best advice available,
that such an attack is highly unlikely within 10 years or
more. That is the advice the previous Government received
* and it came from the same authorities who advise my own
Government on the strategic situation. That situation is
constantly under review, Of course there will always be
uncertainties from time to time. No one can guarantee
a period of full uninterrupted peace. But that's no reason
for believing that an external threat is imminent. To
assume that what is possible must be probable would mean
putting the country on a permanent war footing with all
that would mean for the economy and the welfare of our
people. We have to be quite realistic about this and
realism doesn't mean fearing the worst, or, as I sometimes
suspect, hoping for the worst. I have no time for those
who want to whip up panic, weaken the people's faith in
the strength of our forces and the morale of the forces
themselves. Our whole emphasis has been on efficient organisation,
modern equipment and well-paid professional servicemen.
One of our first actions was to amalgamate the separate
service departments into a. strong, combined Department of
Defence. Further reorganisation is still to come. We
have set about a major program of defence procurement.
Last year we announced plans for two new patrol frigates,
53 replacement tanks for the Army, long-range maritime
patrol aircraft and 45 new fire support vehicles. We are
ensuring that Australian industry has a fair participation
in our procurement of equipment from overseas. To date,
the total value of orders placed on Australian industry
under reciprocal purchasing arrangements exceeds $ 72. million.
We are not just buying hardware from abroad.
hb have many other plans for defence equipment and
the modernisation of defence facilities dockyards, naval
bases, training centres and the like. But, first and foremost,
we recognise the need for dedicated, well-paid, secure and
professionally-minded manpower. Only by making service life
attractive and rewarding will we develop the basis of a
sound defence effort. Sometimes I think that retirement
benefits for officers were made so attractive that too many
of them left the services to take advantage of them. -Nevertheless,
we have established a generous new defence force
retirement and death benefit scheme. There is a $ 1000 tax-free
bonus for re-engagements; wider eligibility for defence service
housing loans; a wider application of repatriation benefits;
approval for credit unions in the services; progressive upgrading
of married quarters and other living accommodation;
improved resettlement benefits. We have appointed an
ombudsman for the services whose job is to investigate
complaints of unfair treatment or miscarriage of justice. 
Ih short we are laying the basis for a happy,
secure life in the peacetime forces of our country.
As one who spent four years in the services I know how
important that is. And with the other reforms we have
made, and the equipment programs under way, I have no
doubt-that Australia is in a better position than she
has ever been to meet any military threat or military
obligation in the foreseeable future. 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE OPENING
OF COLIN GARLAND'S EXHIBITION OF PAINTINGS
KINGSTON, JAMAICA, 1 MAY 1975
1. NUMEROUS ARTISTS HAVE SOUGHT INSPIRATION IN BEAUTIFUL
ISLAND SURROUNDINGS. ONE THINKS OF GAUGUIN IN TAHITI,
OF DONALD FRIEND IN BALI. IN THE SAME COMIPANY,,
I TRUST, WE SHALL THINK( OF COLIN GARLAND IN JAMAICA.
2. HE IS NOT THE FIRST AUSTRALIAN ARTIST TO MhAKE HIS
NAMERAND ENHANCE HIS COUNTRY'IS NAME, ABROAD. NOLAN
AND BOYD ARE GOOD EXAMPLES. IT WAS WITH GUY MARTIN BOYD,
A MEMBER OF THAT CELEBRATED FAMILY, THAT GARLAND BEGAN
WORKING WITH CLAY AT THE AGE OF 14 IN SYDNEY.
THIS EXPERIENCE, AND HIS FORMAL TRAINING AT THE
EAST SYDNEY TECHNICAL COLLEGE, LAID THE BASIS OF
HIS CRAFTSMANSHIP.
3. WHEN HE WAS 22 HE CREATED THE TINTOOKIES A CELEBRATED
PUPPET FAMILY BELOVED BY THOUSANDS OF AUS-[ ZALIANS.
FIRE DESTROYED THE PUPPETS AND THEIR THEATRE FOUR
YEARS AGO. THE TINTOOKIES TOURED WIDELY IN ASIA
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF PETER SCRIVEN. THUS GARLAND'S
WORK IS FAMILIAR IN TWO REGIONS ASIA AND THE CARIBBEANREGIONS
OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THE COMMONWEALTH AND OF
GREAT IMPORTANCE To AUSTRALIA, No ONE HAS DONE MORE TO
DEVELOP THE CULTURAL TIES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND HER
FRIENDS AND NEIGHBOURS. 1 / 2 
HE FIRST CAME TO JAMAICA IN 1962, STAYED THREE YEARS
AND WENT TO LONDON, WHERE HE HELD EXHIBITIONS IN
1964 AND 1965. HE HELD AN EXHIBITION AT THE MACQUARIE
GALLERY IN SYDNEY IN 1966. THE PULL OF JAMAICA WAS
TOO STRONG, HOWEVER. GARLAND RETURNED AND HAS NOW
LIVED HERE FOR NINE YEARS, PAINTING AND TEACHING AT
THE JAMAICAN SCHOOL OF ART. HE WAS AWARDED A GRANT
BY THE WEST GERMAN GOVERNMENT 10 TOUR GERMAN ART
CENTRES, INCLUDING WEST BERLIN, AND IS GRATEFUL TO
THE PRESENT GERMAN AMBASSADOR TO JAMAICA, HIS EXCELLENCY
MR KURT SCHMIDT, FOR HELPING HIM SECURE THIS
OPPORTUNITY,
COLIN GARLAND LIVES A ROUSSEAU-LIKE LIFE-STYLE IN A
HOUSE HIGH IN YOUR BEAUTIFUL MOUNTAINS WHERE THE
DISTANT SEA, FLOATING CLOUDS, BIRDS AND ANIMALS ARE
HIS CONSTANT COMPANIONS. HE HAS IMMERSED HIMSELF
IN JAMAICAN LIFE AND HISTORY, SEVERAL OF HIS PAINTINGS
BEING CONNECTED WITH THE MORANT BAY REBELLION OF
1865. I BELIEVE YOU HAVE LIVING HERE IN JAMAICA A
CONSIDERABLE 20TH CENTURY ARTIST. I AM PROUD OF
HIS AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE AND AM DELIGHTED TO DECLARE
HIS EXHIBITION OPEN, 



Embargo : Sunday_ 5 pm
PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST No. 7
CENTRALISM
Sunday 4 May 1975
I thought I'd talk to you about a subject that is
dear to the heart of the Queensland Premier Centralism.
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen has a regular obsession with centralism,
as we all know. Whenever he objects to something whether
it's a Labor idea or even something from the anti-Labor sidehe
cries " centralism". I don't mind people having bees in
their bonnet, but I think we're entitled to object when their
obsessions hold back the development of a State or interfere
with Government programs that the people have clearly endorsed.
As far as I can understand, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen means
by " icentralism" anything that the Australian Government tries
to do for the people of Queensland. He used to say Medibank
was centralism, but fortunately his Liberal Party colleagues
in the coalition saw the clear benefits of Medibank for their
State. He said our plans to make Townsville a growth centre
were centralism, that our plans to get down the price of land
were centralism, and he used this catchcry to deny Queenslanders
$ 50 million in Federal funds.
The fact is that the powers of the Australian Government
in relation to the States are defined in the Constitution.
If anyone thinks the National Government is overstepping the
mark they can challenge our action in the High Court. That
is the real defence against any centralist policies. In our
federal system the States, the Commonwealth and Local Government
all have a role to play. And we have to play it according to
the constitutional rules.
I have said that it's not just Labor Policies that
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen regards as centralist. He levelled the
same charge at Mr. Gorton when he was Prime Minister.
Mr. Gorton was convinced that oUi? off-shore mineral resources
were the responsibility of the National Government. He was
quite right. Anything that has to do with mineral exports
or overseas trade is a federal responsibility, and other
countries expect to negotiate with the Australian Government
in these matters rather than particular States. Mr. Gorton
got nowhere in his efforts to assert this very clear principle
and Queensland has continued to resist our own efforts to
legislate on off-shore sovereignty. Mr. Gorton had the
same trouble with the Great Barrier Reef. His attempts to
protect the Reef from oil drilling and other damage met
strong opposition from Mr. Bjelke-Petersen. The centralist
slogan was trotted out again. And it was used when Mr. Gorton
sought better tredtm~ rit for Qd.~ eris" I~ iid's Abdrilirids: 
2.
You will remember that the referendum in 1967 -which
was carried overwhelmingly in Queensland gave the Australian
Government clear authority to legislate for the welfare of
Aborigines and, if necessary, to override State laws.
Mr. Gorton sought an end to a number of discriminatory laws
on the statute book in Queensland. Mr. Ejelke-Petersen saw
this as centralism. It is taking a long time to remove
these laws. In the past few weeks my own Government has
introduced legislation in the National Parliament for this
very purpose. One of the great phobias of the Premier concerns
our efforts to make the High Court the final court of appeal
in this country and to end appeals from Australian courts to
the British Privy Council. It was the Holt Government back
in 1967, that stopped appeals to the Privy Council from the
High Court. We think it's time to stop appeals from the
Supreme Courts as well. After all, our Australian High
Court has a reputation second to none throughout the legal
kwortld: oits judgments are everywhere respected. How absurd
have a British Court, sitting in Britain, with judges
appointed in Britain by the British Government, sit in
judgment on Australian courts. Surely it's time surely
we're mature enough to accept that Australians should no
longer litigate their disputes before the Court of another
country. I give you other examples. In his holy war against
centralism, Mr. Bjelke-Petersen has opposed our plan for
an Australian honours system. Never mind that the old
imperial honours are made in the name of an empire that
doesn't exist. Never mind that the Queen herself has
approved the Order of Australia and will confer the awards
herself. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen thinks it's " centralism"
He doesn't want an Australian national anthem either that's
liIcentralist" too despite the fact that a vast majority of
Australians want an anthem of -their own. His silliest idea
of all was to have Her Majesty described as Queen of Queensland.
Imagine if every Canadian province or British county had a
separate monarch a Queen of Ontario, a Queen of Alberta,
a Queen of Lancashire. Where would it end?
It's strange, isn't it, that everything Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
calls centralist" is really pro-Australian, a mark of our true
nationhood and maturity? I wonder what he's really afraid of.
He constantly talks about the meanness and wickedness of
Canberra. The fact is that Queensland has received more in
assistance in hard cash from the present Labor Government
than it has received from any previous Government in history.
No amount of hedging or qualification, no talk of restrictions
or strings or the value of moneXy1 can alter the t?
p~ whxnggr erbust. In t, -I~ t -f4I~ 
3.
Not only does Queensland get much, much more than
she did from the Liberals in Canberra; she gets considerably
more per head of population than other States get now.
Queensland received more than $ 382 per head of population
in 1973-74 compared with $ 343 per head in average payments
to all States. Last year our grants for primary and
secondary education were up 145 per cent on the year before,
tertiary education was up 165 per cent, technical education
110 per cent, welfare housing 20 per cent, aboriginal
advancement nearly 30 per cent. Health and welfare, roads
and urban and regional development in Queensland are all
getting record amounts from my Government.
Next time you hear the Premier talk about centralism,
think of those facts of what the Australian Government
has done for Queensland, and the real help we have given
despite the Premier's obstruction. 



4 ' PARTNERSHIP IN THE PACIFIC AFTER VIETNAM'
TEXT OF THE SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, HON. E. G. WHITLAM, Q. C., M. P.
TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, WASHINGTON
THURSDAY, 8th MAY, 1975
It is not quite two years since I last had the honour of addressing
this National Press Club. In that time, as practitioners of our
respective professions, we have all had to cope with tremendous
events and tremendous changes occurring with unexampled speed.
It was therefore with some little trepidation that I retrieved the
remarks I last made to you to see how they stood the test of time.
I find, however, that the very first point I made has been amply
confirmed in a way few of us could have guessed in July, 1973.
i said then that I was honoured to address representatives of the
world's greatest and most free press in the world's greatest and
most free democracy, and that the strength of each was the strength
of both. If this democracy had been less free the constitutional
upheaval of 1974 would not have occurred. If this democracy had
been less strong it could scarcely have survived so traumatic an
encounter. So in'cetn your invitation for a second time, I
again pay. tribute to the manifest and enduring strength of the
democracy of the United States, of which the press is so fundamental
a part.
In the wake of the remarkable events in Indo-China, all of usleaders
in my calling, commientators-in yours are in the process
of reassessing basic policies and relations. For the United States
in particular, this is bound to be a difficult and perhaps'a painful
process. In that reappraisal the last thing the Government or people
of the United States need are sermons and homilies from foreigners.
Certainly, you don't need them from an Australian. It is true that
I happen to lead a political party which strongly opposed the intervention
in Indo-China; It is also true that I am the Prime Minister
of a nation which for many years supported the intervention and
encouraged the escalation of the war. Whatever recriminations we
might have at home, it is no role for an Australian Prime Minister
to lecture the'United States.
It is, however, very necessary that we should prevent the creation
of new myths about what went wrong. And to do that it'is necessary
to look at past mistakes mistakes in which both countries shared.
The great danger is that in an atmosphere of deep emotion andrecrimination
engendered by the suddenness of events in Indo-China,
we should fasten upon explanations and self-justification and
over-simplifications , which would ensure a return to, a repetition of,
the great mistakes of the past. We have, in particular, to resist
the same sort of myths which developed after the revolution in China.
Those myths, those distortions of reality, perverted our relations
with China for more than a generation. They led directly to the
debacle in Indo-China. 
2.
We should have no truck with any new variation of the ' stab in
the back' theory that the war in Vietnam was lost not in Saigon
but here in Washington. The truth is that the United States did
not ' lose' Vietnam, anymore than she ' lost' China. Vietnam was
not America's to lose. What was defeated was not the United States
and her -allies but a policy of foreign intervention which was bound
to fail. There was no time in the past thirty years when such a
policy could have succeeded. The tragedy for us all, but above
all for the people of Indo-China, is that a policy so manifestly
doomed from the beginning should have been carried through for so
long. It was never true that the honour and prestige of the United States
and her allies were bound up with the survival of the Saigon regime,
any more than it was ever true that the honour, or prestige, or
security of the United States were bound up with the fate of
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-Shek.
When I spoke to you last I spoke of the ' second opportunity' we
had gained because of the moves towards reconciliation with China
and with the signing of the Paris Agreement in January, 1973. I
said :' For twenty years I have been appalled at the damage we of
the West have done to ourselves and to other peoples by our Western
ideological pre-occupations, particularly in South East Asia. We
are not going to be readily forgiven for throwing away the chance
we had for a sebtlement. in Indo-China in 1954 after Korea, after
Geneva. We have now been given a second chance. It must not be
thrown away.' Unfortunately my hopes, the hopes of the world, were
not fulfilled after January 1973. The gross breaches of the Paris
Agreements by both sides pol'itical breaches, military breache*
made it inevitable that the final settlement in Indo-China would
be reached by the arbitrament of war.
Yet in the wider sense that second opportunity, that second chance
of which I spoke, still remains, the question now is : What are to
be our relations and our conduct towards Vietnam whether there
be one Government of Vietnam or two? Are we to treat Vietnam
after 1975 as we treated China after 1949? Through fear or
frustration, because of our failure to impose the will'of the
West on Indo-China, are we to treat Vietnam as the new pariah,
the new untouchable among nations? No-one supposes that it is
going to be a simple or easy task to establish meaningful relations
with Vietnam,-a Viet nam emerging from thirty years of civil war
prolonged and deepened by foreign intervention. It is going to
be one of the most difficult tasks for statesmanship, for the countries
in Australia's region and for the United States.
Two hundred years ago on 22 March 1775 -Edmund Burke said
' Magnanimity in politics is not seldom the truest wi-dsom'. It
was his great speech on conciliation with the American colonies.
He was advising another mighty nation which was about to suffer
humiliation at the hands of another small band bf revolutionaries 
3.
-not because that nation was wicked or weak but because it was
committed to policies doomed to fail. Magnanimity in the face of
failure is much more difficult than magnanimity in victory. The
present prosperity of Western Germany and Japan attests America's
unparalleled magnanimity in victory. The other, more difficult,
response lies ahead in Indo-China.
This is very much a time for a realistic assessment of our
strengths and opportunities and for a good deal of confidence
in those strengths and opportunities. There are those who feel
that because American policy suffered a defeat in Vietnam, we
should be pessimistic about American policy elsewhere, and ignore
American achievements elsewhere. Dangerous and difficult as the
Middle East problem undoubtedly is, taxing as it is for Western
statesmanship, it should not blind us to the wider stability and
security achieved in the world during the past two decades. Who
would deny that the world is a safer place -today that it was in
the aftermath of World War II? Who would deny remem bering Berlin,
remembering Greece,, remembering Korea, remembering Cuba that the
threats to peace today are less menacing than those posed by the
critical flashpoints and monolithic confrontations of a decade or'
a generation ago? I hope we shall keep a sense, of perspective and
reality in these matters, keeping in mind the real progress we
have made towards a safer world, and not allow ourselves to be
panicked or dismayed by lesser problems than those we have surmounted.
before. In the specific matter of Vietnam, I am not going to be panicked
by an outcome achieved militarily in 1975 which might have come
about politically in 1954. I am intent upon reaching a modus vivendia
meaningful, constructive relationship with Vietnam in 1975, as
we would assuredly have had to do some time between 1954 and 1975,
and as with such needless and damaging delay we have done with China.
It is not, however, by focussing exclusively upon Vietnam or even
upon Indo-China that we can get the true perspective of our real
strengths and opportunities in the region Australia's opportunities,
or America's strengths. There can be no suggestion of wanting to
shrug off the events in Indo-China. On the contrary there are
great lessons to be learnt. Nonetheless, let's coolly assess both
the present and the future..
If we look at the Pacific Basin area what do we find? The most
developed and some of the strongest of the dozen or so most
significant nations upon or around the four Pacific continents
of Asia, Australia, North America and South America, are flourishing
democracies. The United States' most important friends in this
vast area, countries like Canada, Mexico, New ' Zealand, Australia
and above all, Japan, have never been stronger stronger in themselves,
stronger in their basic friendship twoards the United States. 
The Asean Nations Indonesia, The Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia,
Singapore are working closely and successfully together to
promote their common interests in a natural and viable regional
grouping. These countries happen to be those cast by the theorists
in the role of the dominoes. Not one of them will give any thanks
fok being cast in such a role. Each of them will work in its own
way to accommodate itself to the new political realities in South
East Asia. Each recognises that it is primarily its own internal
strength and resilience which will safeguard it against external
threats. Each recognises that the prime guarantee of national
integrity and security lies in developing the forms of Government
best suited to itself and ensuring that Government is in tune with
national needs and popular aspirations.
There is a further cause for confidence. On the Pacific side of
the Asian region, Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand, Australia,
Fiji, Western Samoa and Tonga, and on'the Indian Ocean side,
India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, are all members of the Commonwealth
of Nations. I have been meeting their leaders in Jamaica this
week. In this rema rkable association of nations not one Head of
Government ' is Communist,. yet not one Head of Government was plunged
into despair because of the events in Indo-China. In our communique
issued on Tuesday the nations of the Commonwealth 34 of them, said
this :' Heads of Government welcomed the end of the prolonged conflict
in Indo-China, urged countries in a position to do so to contribute
to international assistance for the urgent tasks of rehabilitation
and reconstruction and looked forward to the new. Governments of the
region playing their full part in the Community of Nations.' No
panic here, no desperation. Yet, as I point out, many nations of
the Commonwealth are the very nations who are supposed to be the
likely victims of the falling dominoes. The truth is that all of
us have great problems of one kifid or another yet each of us is
basically confident of surmounting those problems in our * own way.
Nor was there throughout our meeting in Jamaica any disposition to
knock the United States, to recriminate against her or to suggest
that the United States will not be a good ally or a trustworthy
friend. Indeed, with the war in Vietnam over, many nations and
Australia is one will have even greater confidence in America as
an ally, for we know that American resolve, American capacity,
American resources will no longer be weakened or dissipated in a
fruitless cause.
President Ford was entirely justified in remarking* two weeks ago',
that because the United States' policy had not succeeded everywhere
it should not be. assumed it had succeeded nowhere. The policy
failed in Indo-China betcause it was foredoomed to failure. The
policy succeeded in Japan and in Europe because it had the necessary
ingredients of success a realistic appreciation of America's own
interests of the people of Japan and Western Europe. It failed
in Indo-China because the policy there was based neither on
America's true interests nor on anything that was possible or
relevant as far as the interests or aspirations of the peoples of
Indo-China were concerned. But the great aims of American policy
can now continue undiminished and undeterred, free of the impediments
and distractions and distortions of Indo-China. 
4 The great thrust of that policy rests upon the detente with
the Soviet Union and with associating China in a wider detente.
Nothing that has happened in Indo-China would warrant the United
States being deflected from that great goal. For the essential
mteaning of detente is simply the prevention of world war, or
world nuglear war. It is precisely because this is the highest
risk that mankind has ever faced the destruction of civilisation
itself--that this is the highest goal a nation could ever set
for itself.
I view with concern and contempt efforts made by some in countries
like Australia and the United States to downgrade or denigrate
the efforts being made towards detente. No one asserts that the
present partial detente really solves the great question of
preserving world peace. But to go back now, to retreat from the
Agreements And undertakings already reached, however slight,
however tentative, is to retreat towards ultimate disaster. I
do not assert that detente as it now exists is complete. But I
do assert that-it must be made complete if any of us are to surviye.
We can begin by efhsuring that regions of the world still largely
untouched.-by great power rivalry continue to remain free of it.
In that connection, Australia has lent her voice to the maintenance
of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. All of us who support such
proposals, all of us who support detente, know that the difficulties
in the way of achieving detente are daunting indeed. But certainly,
upon our success or failure turns the future of mankind. And it
is because of this that the United States remains the true leader
of the world and, as much as she used to be, ' the last, best hope
of the world'. For it is to the United States that the West chiefly
looks for meaningful leadership in that direction, If detente is
to succeed, it will continue to require American initiatives,
American courage, American leadership.
For many years to come, people like us, America ns, Australians,
politicians, journalists, will be examining in arguments, in
articles, in speeches, in books what happened in Indo-China. This
is as it should be. For so great a disaster, so great a mistake,
such great suffering, cannot be easily dismissed or even forgotten.
Ile shall all have to live with it for the rest of our lives. Yet
even so, we have to go on to the future. In the two years since
I last spoke to you America has undergone a vast domestic, as
well as a vast international, catharsis. With those profound traumas
behind you, with their bitterness and misery being purged away,
what better time to profit by experience and build on the true
strengths of American democracy and American idealism? Here is
an opportunity not-just for America but for all of us to end
our long preoccupation with military alignments in Asia, our
ideological confrontations, our cold war hangups, and open a new
chapter in Western co-operation. Let-* the deeper issues of poverty,
overpopulation and mal-distribution of the world's wealth assume
their proper importance in our hearts and minds. These are the
real problems of Asia. These are ' the real problems of the world.
These, I trust, will be the real concerns of the United States.
With your great tradition of moral leadership, your unexampled
generosity, your vision, your energy, your sheer'zest for
accomplishment, you will find new inspiration in this taska
task in which Australia will be a ready and a willing partner.
S C 0 r; 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO
THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB on 8TH MAY, 1975
. Mr. William Broom, President, National Press Club: Our first
question, Mr. Prime Minister. We want to know about your talks
with our President Ford. Did you discuss with President Ford
a program for Vietnamese reconstruction? From your talks with
Congressional leaders in our Congress, did you detect strong
unwillingness to fund Vietnamese reconstruction?
Prime Minister: I think it would have been gracious to add that
also at the top table among the expatriates and the visitors. and
the authors is the Deputy Secretary of State and Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for the part of the region from which I come.
There was some exchange of views between the President and me
on these subjects but not lengthy ones. I can appreciate the
difficulties there are at this stage in asking the American
people to accept greater financial burdens in reconstructing and
re-habilitating Vietnam. I stated the Australian Government's
attitude that was my business and I said that in the Australian
Government's budget for the-financial year which ends this June
there had been provision made for reconstruction and re-habilitation
in both South and North Vietnam and that I had no doubt there would
be provision in the budget which we will be bringing in in August
to continue, and in fact to increase, that provision, and preferably
we would want reconstruction and re-habilitation to take place
through international organisations. Where they have been available,
the Australian Government has . made contributions to them, not only
in the budget but again in the last two months.
Mr. Broom In what way can Australia and the United States
best help in reconstruction and re-habilitation in Vietnam?
Prime Minister Well, I believe in all these matters one has
to consider what are the views of the people of the country itself
and preferably, as I said earlier, these should be ascertained
through international organisations. There may well be some
reluctance, some hesitation, some inhibitions, in the new
Government in South Vietnam, or the Government in North Vietnam
or the Government in Cambodia having relations with the Australian
Government for that matter, or with many other Governments. But
through international bodies, one would hope that there could be
some such consultation. The areas where we have found in Australia
that it was easiest to make arrangements for re-habilitation was
in things like water supplies, hospital facilities and public
facilities of that character, that is material things which were
lacking to a very great extent and in fact had been very largely
destroyed. These are things which are of a non-ideological
character, they are obviously needed and there are obviously
matters in these fields where developed countries, like Australia
and the United States, can and I believe should assist. 
Mr. Broom: Many in our audience wonder what Australia's
policy will be towards Vietnamese refugees. Will Australia
honour its signature to the 1951 United Nations Refugee
Treaty and admit them?
Prime Minister And also to the 1967 protocol. We have
already, some days ago, approached the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to suggest that he should coordinate
an international program to re-settle those Vietnamese who
have fled from their country. It -i somewhat unfortunate
that in the region itself there are very few countries which
have signed the ' 51 convention and the ' 67 protocol. They
include Australia and New Zealand and Fiji, Canada, some
countries which still have colonial responsibilities in the
area, like Britain and France, and I don't believe such
significant countries as the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand
or Japan.
Mr. Broom: Another question: We wonder how you assess future
policies in South Asia and South East Asia of the Communist
powers, the Soviet Union, China and the new Communist States
of Indo China. Do you foresee any attempt to exploit the
current power vacuum in that region and do you see any dangers
ahead? Prime Minister I am not quite sure . hat is intended by a
power vacuum. What has changed, I suppose, is that over the
last two years or more there-has been a withdrawal or expulsion
of American power on the mainland. American power, of course,
in the air. and on the sea is immense, the greatest in the world
and mobile. But I believe that in using the word ' Communist'
we have to realise that there is no monolithic ideology or
action by Governments which are totally Communist or predominantly-
Communist. We have realised for the last fifteen. years that the
Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China, while both competing
for the crown of being orthodox Communist Governments, would be
in very great disagreement on the Communist ideology or the action
which it entails or requires. Now, by the same token, I have no
less doubt that the principal occupation of any Communist Government
around the world, like any other Government around the world, is
and must be what it conceives to be the interests of its nation,
its own nation. That is, a Communist Government does not cease
to be a nationally oriented Government. That is clearly the
intention, the practice of the Soviet Government, of the Government
of the Peoples Republic of China, and I would guess that it will
be the attitude of the new Cambodian. Government and of the Government
or Governments in Vietnam. It would be, I should imagine, completely
unlikely that they would all concert some program in the region.
They will be looking after what each of them concedes to be the
interests of its own nation. And the Vietnamese Government, or
Governments, will have their time very fully occupied in reconstruction,
rehabilitation and quite probably reconciliation. 
Mr. Broom President Ford, earlier this week, proclaimed that
the United States would reaffirm closer ties with the anti-
Communist Governments of South Korea and Taiwan. Is building
an anti-Communist alliance a viable policy in the light of
recent changes in Asia?
Prime Minister As I understand the President as having said,
and if I understand his attitude after our conversation yesterday,
he has resolved to fulfil the obligations of his nation which it
has undertaken to other nations, and of course the United States
has undertaken obligations, bilateral obligations, to each of
the political entities that the questioner mentions. It is not
forming any new association or alliance, it is honouring
continuing obligations.
Mr. Broom Your country was the first to recognize the Khmer
Rouge Government after the fall of Phnom Penh. Will you protest
the atrocities of the new Government which are being revealed
today? Prime Minister We were not the first to recognize the new
Government in Phnom Penh. We were prompt in acknowledging it,
but quite obviously, to take one example that should be in the
minds of everyone, the French Government acted quite some time
before the Australian Government. We do not have any representatives
at the moment in Phnom Penh there are some difficulties of
communication with Phnom Penh or with the Head of State, who
is still resident in Peking. I have no knowledge, therefore,
officially or in any way directly there are no Australian
correspondents either in Phnom Penh as to what is going on
there. If there is any evidence which comes to us directly, of
course we will protest. That is, in the event of any atrocities,
of course we will protest about them. We have done that in all
the countries it has occurred to our knowledge since we came into
office. Mr. Broom Just one more question on events in your part of
the world. How do you believe the question of a nuclear free
zone for the Pacific will be resolved, keeping in mind that only
one of the ANZUS partners, New Zealand, supports it?
Prime Minister I understand that the proposal for a nuclear
free zone in the Pacific, that is an extension westward of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, might be proposed by New Zealand for the
agenda of this year's United Nations. It might come up in the
form of discussing the proposal. Now all I would say, my own
Government's attitude, is that we place priority on achieving
Treaties in the nuclear field to which the nuclear power will
subscribe. That is, we believe the first obligation for the
nations is to secure the support of the United States, the Soviet
Union, Britain, China, France, to these various Treaties. And
we have done what we can to persuade other nations to ' sign and
to ratify such Treaties, in particular, I suppose, the Nuclear 
Non Proliferation Treaty. When my Government came in, it very
promptly ratified that Treaty and it was encouraging to us
that about a week ago West Germany and Italy and the three
Benelux countries also signed it as well. We would hope that
Japan will do so. We are disappointed that Indonesia has not
done so and that India has not done so, but this is the priority
that my Government fixes in matters of disarmament. We want
Treaties of restraint to which the nuclear powers will subscribe.
Mr. Broom Now that the United States Congress has approved
indemnity, will you approve the use of Australia's ports by
United States nuclear warships?
Prime Minister The use of Australian ports by nuclear powered
naval vessels was suspended by the previous Australian Government.
It applied to United States and British naval vessels. It has
been considered quite . recently again, and in particular, in the
light of the fact that the Congress has now approved in effect
a total indemnity against any adverse effects of the operation
of nuclear powered vessels in Australian waters, in any host
country. There is another matter which I imagine will next be.
considered in Australia and that is the environmental aspects
which are very largely a responsibility of the State Governments
in Australia. We adopted a Federal system from the United States,
we imposed it on a British parliamentary system, but it is in a
more rudimentary form. So therefore, while in the United States
you are used to the co-mingling of powers, so that if any area,
such as a port, there are State responsibilities and Federal
responsibilities, the Federal ones prevail. In Australia, this
is not yet so clear. It is a point of view which I would very
much support myself. The Australian naval ports all happen to
be very considerable maritime centres. The biggest naval base
in Australia, for instance is in the harbour of Sydney, and
obviously the State Government would have to be concerned there
because the safeguard arrangements are in the hands of the State
authorities. Mr. Broom We have a lot of questions about your country. How
things are going there, you know it is a long way away from us
and not too many of us get there. One person wants to know how
is the Opera House doing? Do you have any more architecture of
that sort going up?
Prime Minister Fabulously. I hope so.
Mr. Broom And what are Australia's plans for developing a
uranium enrichment industry?
Prime Minister Australia does not have the knowhow nor, I
guess, the capital to develop a uranium enrichment industry. 
We have undertaken jointly with Japan a feasibility study to
see whether we can get the capital and knowhow to estbalish
such an industry. We have some preliminary negotiations in this
respect twith the competing European systems, the one developed
by West Germany, the Netherlands and Britain, and the other
one being developed by France and Italy, and I think Iran is
involved in that also. You might not all realise that Australia
seems to have about one fifth of the known reserves of uranium
in the, shall I say, the West.
Mr. Broom Do you think that might give an OPEC type power
to Australia in the nuclear age?
Prime Minister If consumers are reasonable, no. Let's face
it. The consumers so exploited the employee class and the
colonial economies that they provoked organised retaliation.
What my country prefers is arrangements between producers and
consumers. In respect of renewable resources, crops, we have
followed that policy for decades. We would still like to follow
it. We regret that other countries no longer seem to wish to do
so. In respect of non-renewable resources, minerals, then
Australia has been driven into the situation of considering her
interests in association with other countries which have similar
interests and those associations in which the Australian Government
participated, or in which it is contemplating participating, have
in general been accepted as reasonable by countries, administrations,
like the United States.
Mr. Broom Several questions about food, of which your country
is a great producer. What are your views on world grain stockpiling
to prevent a shortage? Do you fear retaliation from world beef
importers or exporters because of Australia's beef sales during
this time of surplus? What are you doing and what will you do
to aid your ailing livestock industry?
Prime Minister Well, we wish that we could make more beef sales,
and I hope you won't think it begrudging of me if I say that the
United States has somewhat disappointed us in this respect. I
won't say surprised, I will say disappointed. Australia is one
of the few countries which exports beef. There are very few.
After all, most of the world's population doesn't eat meat.
Very few countries indeed can afford to import meat and those
that can are those with which Australia has many associations,
Western Europe, Japan and the United States, and Australia has
supplied all of those markets. Last year, Japan, without any
warning, stopped buying meat. The European Economic Community
without any warning stopped buying meat and America reduced
purchases of meat, and that of course very greatly harmed our
meat industry, our cattle industry. We have certain advantages
of area and climate which make for economies in meat productions.
In those circumstances, we resent the fact that the few customers
that there are in the world, the ones upon which we felt we were
entitled to depend, completely ( most of them) cut off purchases
of meat from Australia. In those circumstances, it is not
surprising there has been a very great depression in some areas 
in Australia and I believe that consumers ought to bear this
in mind. If they want cheap meat, regular supplies of it,
they must be regular purchasers because it obviously takes
some time to produce beasts to the stage where they are to
be killed and so on. Now, as regards wheat and other grains,
Australia is one of the few countries which produces a surplus.
Canada and the United States would be the other significant
ones. By contrast to meat, wheat and grains in general] are
things that everybody in the world consumes and always have
and it is easily transported and easily stored and wherever
there is a drought or a natural disaster in the world the thing
which is easiest to provide to alleviate it is wheat or other
grains. We now find in Australia, and no doubt Canada and
the United States find it as well, that the developing countries,
those that have a population increasing more rapidly than resources,
that they are very happy for us to provide wheat on favourable
terms, credit terms, and so on, which in effect mean gifts.
Now other developed countries, ones which do not have the
productivity of the United States and Canada and Australia, are
very happy to provide. favourable credit terms to developing
countries for the purchase of manufactured goods. Developing
countries do not need them and do not even want them. But we
can never seem to come to some arrangements where developed
countries, such as West Germany or Japan, who can well afford
to help alleviate the conditions in developing countries or to
overcome natural disasters, they don't seem very keen to provide
credit to the United States or to Canada, or Australia, to provide
their surplus stocks. I should . point out that, while Australia
is a developed country in the normal context of its economic
pattern, its production, its investment, its employment is
overwhelmingly i. n the manufacturing field, secondary industry,
yet our overseas trade is still in the pattern of our neighbours
or of other developing countries. We depend on the income we
get for non-renewab. le assets like minerals or renewable assets
like crops, or to a certain extent meat, and in those circumstances
we just cannot afford to be unilaterally benevolent to the rest
of the world. Developed countries ought to get together more
in this respect. Australia has had a very bad deal from Western
Europe and Japan. It has not had too good a deal from the United
States as regards meat and, similarly, here we can ally ourselves
with the United States. The rest of the developed world does
not make it easy for us to use our agricultural productivity
for the benefit of people who suffer natural disasters or whose
human rate of increase is outpacing the rate of increase of their
resources.
Mr. Broom To carry that discussion just one step further,
is there any prospect of an Australia/ New Zealand/ Canada/ United
States common market?
Prime Minister Very little I would think. I don't believe
that this is really what is needed in the Pacific. Inevitably
any such common market would be regarded as being for the benefit
of the manufacturing countries and would be regarded as being
to the disadvantage, certainly being no advantage to the developing
ones. What we have to realise is two things. That is developing 
countries want to see that the price they get for their exports
keeps pace with the price they have to pay for their imports
and secondly, that there is a steady increase in the processing
of their commodities wi. thin their own shores. After all, we
all know that the developed countries, the manufacturing countries,
are prosperous, not just because of the commodities they produce
but because of the processing they apply to those commodities.
Now the prosperity of developing countries is adversely affected
by the fact that they can't depend on the price they get for
their commodities and they find it extraordinarily difficult
to get the capital, the knowhow, to process a fair proportion
of those commodities themselves. And the Pacific, with the
exception of the countries you mentioned, is very much a developing
area. And the proper way to keep them happy is to make it plain
to them so that it is visible and palpable to their populations,
that conditions are getting better and during their lifetimes
they will be getting better still. And that is not achieved,
I suggest, by just having another rich man's club in the Pacific.
That is having a common market. That is how it would be regarded.
For Australia and New Zealand, Canada and the United States, add
in Japan if you like, were to form a common market, then there
is no doubt that the rest of the Pacific would think that we
were out to take advantage of them. And also I would have to
be quite plain with you. There are a very great number of people
in Australia, and still more in New Zealand, who would think that
such a common market was to the advantage of those companies
which are domiciled in the United States.
Mr. Broom What has been Australia's experience with the TFX
or Fill fighter airplane? Did you approve the purchase of that
plane? Prime Minister We are taking good care of them and Australia
has the most formidable air force for thousands of miles around.
There is nobody who could approach Australia with hostile intent
by sea or air. My party when in Opposition was extremely dubious
about the acquisition of the Fill, the TFX, and there was good
reason for it because we found out that a contract had been made
without lawyers'advice on our part. Whatever you say about lawyers,
it is at least prudent to have their advice when you are signing
a contract for some hundreds of millions of dollars and our
predecessors did not take that elementary precaution. The
Prime Ministers at the time were all lawyers but they left it
to people in the Department of Defence, including a Minister
-who had been a pharmacist, to sign the contract. Well, there
happened to be some flaws in the contract and it took about
ten years to get the aircraft. I suppose one would have doubts
whether it was necessary to have such sophisticated aircraft in
our part of the world. It would seem that it is disproportionately
technical but nevertheless I have no doubt whatever that it is
a very effective aircraft and while it seems to be more than we
need to cope with anybody who is ever likely to approach Australia,
yet by the same token, there is no doubt that nobody could afford
to approach Australia with hostile intent. ' Cr I" 
8.
Mr. Broom What sort of retaliation does your Government
plan towards thlie United States if Harry Hopman becomes the
non-playing captain of the American Davis Cup teamn.
Prime Minister This is a sore point that you should bring
along the most distinguished of Australian expatriates to
your hospitable board with me here. We know that Hopman is
the best in the world and we don ' t mind sharing our best with
the United States. ~ 1_ 1_ 



PRIME MINISTER'S QUEENSLAND BROADCAST-NO. 8
TRANSPORT
Sunday 11 May 1975
It's a sad fact that Brisbane has some of the worst
public transport in Australia. You all know what an ordeal
it can be getting to work, or home again or anywhere else
for that matter on overcrowded or dilapidated trains,
often running late into the bargain. Run-down old-fashioned
transport services are not just uncomfortable and slow; they
are uneconomic as well. More and more people are forced to
take their cars to work, and the number of passengers declines.
Transport losses increase, fares keep going up, and still
more people are discouraged from using the services. It's
a vicious circle, It's a problem faced in most of the world's
great cities, but with this difference: other-cities are doing
something about it. Brisbane is lagging behind.
When Labor camne in we.-gave a high priority to upgrading
urban transport services in our great cities. Of course we
can't do this without the ' cooperation of the States. We have
offered the Queensland Government almost $ 20 million over the
next three and a half years to electrify your suburban railways
and upgrade Brisbane transport services generally. No national
Government has ever made free grants for urban transport before.
The Bjelke-Petersen Governmentdithered and delayed for a long
time before accepting our proposals. As far back as 1957 the
Country Party in this State scrapped the previous Labop
Government's plans for suburban electrification. They did
nothing for 18 years until my Government's offer was made
last year. Some of you may remember the modern urban passenger
carriage we put on display in City Square a few months ago.
That's a sample of the comfortable, streamlined trains we
hope to see eventually on all Brisbane's suburban railways.
And it's not just in city transport that a Labor
Government is getting on with the job. Previou ' s Liberal
Governments in Canberra shirked one of the great development*
projects needed in Queensland a national highway linking
her coastal cities wiLth Brisbane and the southern States.
Labor has given the go-ahead for a high-grade all-weather
highway to link Cairns with Brisbane and eventuall' with
Sydney and Melbourne. Despite opposition obstruction we
have passed the necessary legislation to provide $ 1,126 million
for our national roads program over the next three years.
We are the first National Government in Australia to undertake
this essential program. No State. Government has had the
resources to do it alone. No previous Federal Government
cared enough to do it even though they had thq necessary
constitutional powers. We are using those powers. We are
getting on with the job. 
2.
lh are doing a lot for other roads as well. For
example, to improve Mt. Isa's links with the rest of
Queensland the Australian Government will help build
: the Landsborough Highway from Mt. Isa to Brisbane as a
full-scale all-weather road. This will be part of the
national highways program, so Mt. Isa will be linked in
due coburse by first-class roads to Melbourne and Sydney.
On top of that we will spend $ 24 million in
Queensland on northern beef roads over the next three
years. All of this means a first-class rural and intercity
road network for Queensland. It's worth recalling
that the Bjelke-Petersen Government in 1972 promised that
all Queensland State highways would be full bitumen roads
by 1975. Of course that won't happen. But with the help
of the Australian Labor Government Queensland's roads will
be among the best in Australia.
There are two other matters I want to mention in
the transport area. One is the new international terminal
we are building at Brisbane airport at cost of more than
$ 4 million. We expect it to.. be finished by the end of this
year. The other concerns the Australian National Line. We
want to see Queensland's coastal cities served by A. N. L.
ships. There is no reason in the world why Australia's own
shipping line shouldn't~ ply between the ports on Queensland's
coast. But Mr. Bjelke-Petersen won't let them. He insists
that A. N. L. ships should only sail between a Queensland port
and a port in another State. And he's alone among the Premiers
in preventing the A. N. L. providing services between ports in
Queensland. As a result we have the absurd situation of
foreign ships being chartered to carry bauxite from Weipa
to Gladstone -a job that Australian ships could do just as
well. I'm afraid Mr. Bjelke-Petersen's obstinacy hasn't
helped transport services in Queensland. I spoke earlier
of railways. When we came to office the Labor Government
offered to take over financial responsibility for all State
railways. These railways are a crippling burden on State
budgets and financing them puts a heavy strain on a State's
resources. There is no constitutional barrier to the
Australian Government taking over these services in fact
the Constitution specifically envisages such a possibility
in Section 51. We have just reached agreement with South
Australia which will relieve that State of the financial
burden of its non-metropolitan rail services. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen
has refused to discuss our offer. So whenever you hear
Mr. Bjelke-Petersen crying poor mouth, or complaining of a
lack of help from the Australian Government, remember the
opportunity he has turned down to boost his State revenues
and improve transport systems throughout Queensland. My
Government is doing everything in its power to help. It
will be a great pity if Queensland people have to put up
any longer with bad roads or run-down buses and trains because
their Premier won't cooperate with a National Labor Government. 



1W EMBARGO 7.30 P
NATIONAL BROADCAST A
BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
13 MAY 1975
I would like to report to you on the valuable and wide-ranging
discussions I have been having overseas during the Parliamentary
recess. With the Special Minister of State and senior officials
of the Australian Government, I have been attending the Meeting
of Commnonwealth Heads of Government in Kingston, Jamaica. On
the way to Jamaica we visited Peru the first visit by an
Australian Prime Minister to a South American country. And on
the way home I had talks in Washington with President Ford,
Vice-President Rockefeller, Secretary of State Kissinger and
senior members of the United States Congress. So in the space
of a fortnight there have been opportunities for Australia to
exchange views with leaders from every part of the world to
establish new friendships and build on old ones.
0There h as'never been a time when events in the world have
moved so swiftly or suddenly as they have during the past two
years. The extraordinary changes in our own region the recent
decisive events in Indo-China were of course very much in our
minds; but that's only a part of the story, part of the pattern
of change and upheaval in recent years. Since the Commonwealth
Heads of Government met in Ottowa in 1973 there have been farreaching
developments in Africa, in Cyprus, in the Middle East;
the western nations have grappled with inflation and unemployment;
the gap between the developing and the developed nations has
grown wider. So this is very much a time when national leaders
must get together to discuss their problems in an atmosphere
of frankness and intimacy.
I know there is a tendency in some quarters to disparage the
Commonwealth as a debating society, or as the vestige of a
bygone empire. I don't share those views for a moment. Here
we have an organisation that brings together heads of Government-
Presidents and Prime Ministers or their representatives from
34 nations representing a quarter of the world's people, nations
of every kind, rich and poor, consumers and producers, agricultural
and industrial, developed and developing, and from every part of
the world.
There is an obvious value in this diversity, but there is an
equal value in the shared traditions of the Commonwealth partners.
The very fact that all our discussions are in English gives an
ease and familiarity to our meetings that cannot be valued too
highly. It's not so long ago that many member nations were a
little cynical and indifferent about the Commonwealth and
some States were reluctant to join it. There is no sign of
such attitudes today. At the next meeting, for example, Papua
New Guinea will take her seat as an independent nation; and in
the years ahead other newly independent countries of the South
Pacific will be admitted to Commonwealth membership. So year 
2.
by year the Commonwealth gains in numbers, gains in strength,
and I believe, gains in wisdom, experience, and prestige.
The -truly remarkable thing about our discussions in Jamaica
was the readiness of every nation to get down to essential
issues and the striking measure of agreement we reached. You
will remember that Commonwealth conferences in the past were
often occasions for squabbling and grandstanding. There were
endless confrontations between the nations of the old white
Commonwealth and the newly independent states of Asia and
Africa. There was nothing of that sort in Jamaica. On the
particular issues of racism and de-colonisation, for example,
there was complete agreement. Every nation confirmed its
total support for the African people of Southern Rhodesia-
Zimbabwe in their struggle for independence on the basis
of majority rule. Every nation reaffirmed the need for the
Indian Ocean to remain an area of peace and stability and
expressed concern about military bases in the region and
when we remember that something like half the member nations
0 of the Commonwealth are island, coastal or hinterland states
of the Indian Ocean that is not perhaps surprising. Again,
every nation supported the-need for international assistance
in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Indo-China. Every
nation expressed concern at the continued testing and proliferation
of nuclear weapons and reaffirmed the need for a comprehensive
ban on all nuclear weapons tests.
Every nation supported the withdrawal of foreign armed forces.
from Cyprus. I was particularly gratified, on the Cyprus
0 question, that Australia was accepted as a member of a committee
of eight Commonwealth nations which will seek ways of restoring
the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus on the
basis of United Nations resolutions.
On all these issues I was able to put Australia's views, and
in every case the outcome was deeply satisfying not just
because the resolutions of the conference happen to-coincide
with my own Government's foreign policies, but because they
represent the views of so many different states, and were
reached without rancour, without dissension, in an atmosphere
of extraordinary goodwill.
There was one problem in Jamaica that stood out above all othersthe
need to find a new and equitable international economic
order. All of us recognised that many, if not most, of the
world's problems really come down to a single basic issuehow
best to distribute the world's resources, how best to
reduce the disparities between the rich and poor nations,
between the haves and the have-nots in the world. 
3.
In tackling that question the most difficult challenge
facing mankind I believe we were tackling the root cause
-of tension and conflict in the world. of course it would be
rash to pretend that we found the answers, but we did find
a remarkable readiness on every side among the rich industrial
nations as well as the poorer ones to seek the answers.
Everyone agreed on the range and complexity of the issues
involved. Everyone agreed that trade, not aid, is the real
answer to the needs of the developing countries. We agreed
to set up a group of experts who will draw up, for consideration
by Commonwealth Governments, a comprehensive and inter-related
program of practical measures to help close the gap between the
rich and poor countries.
In Washington I was able to give some account of our discussions
to President Ford, as well as hear his own views on current
problems, both-in America and the world at large. In the
wake of the recent events in Indo-China, the President assured
me of America's firm and continuing commitment to her allies
in our region and in other parts of the world. Yet welcome
as these assurances were, they are not the sole basis for my
confidence in Australia's--future, in Australia's security, or
in Australia's place in the world. Everywhere I went in my
talks in Peru, where we have forged a new and valuable link
with a Pacific nation, in my talks in Jamaica with Commonwealth
leaders, in my talks'in Washington I found both great goodwill
for Australia and a calm, steady belief in the strength of our
common institutions, in our friendships and our alliances, in
the ability of nations to overcome their difficulties with
rational programs and united efforts. Nowhere in my talks with
world leaders did I find any disposition to panic, to lose faith,
to lose heart, to lose nerve. The United States, in particular,
having come through her great domestic and international agonies,
will be better placed now to build on her true strengths and
profit by past experience. I said as much in Washington; and
I pledged that Australia would be a ready and willing partner
of the United States in her efforts to build a more rational
world order and tackle the great problems of the developing world.
We still have to beat some problems at home, but they are no
different in kind from those of other comparable countries.
Where we in Australia are truly fortunate is in our strengths
the undoub~ ed strength of our friendships, the rare abundance
of our resources, the tested spirit and steadiness of our people,
the goodwill we enjoy in every part of the world. 



SPEBCY TH PA, TI IO TEHEN[ 1I( MjSilTOR / RT 5FCEE GC. LiHSETCLENTI0 CH. P
AT GR EE N HI LLSNN, I S IN!
Oil MAY 16, 1975
I AM~ Df ELIGHTI'. D TO BE HERE W'ITH YOU TODA. tY TO
CELEBIRATE THE OP" ENING OF THIS IM-PREssivE E. C, CLOSE CENTRE,
ALDERP~ i,'\ UNICOMB IS A U'NIQUIELY SUCCESSFUL ADVOCATE OF
INVITATIONS TO V'ISIT THE M~ AITLAND REGION. IHE INSISTED
THAT I COIME WERE FOR THE HEART Olt -rHE HUNT'ER FrESTFIVAL
LAST OCTOBER, AND HERE I AM BACK AGAIN JUST SIX M"' ONTH9S
L ATE. I' ONLY SORRY I DIDN'T MAKE IT FOR THE VINTAGEI
N IACH YOU NIIGHT RECALL THAT IHAD INTEINDED TO ACCEPT
YOUR INVWITA7ION TO LAY THE FOUNDATrIOi. STONE OF THE CLOSE
CENTrRE' A YEAR AGO YIEST'E-RDAY. UNFORTUNATELY I WA" S HIEAVILY
INVOLVED IN. AN ELECTION CAMPAIG'Ni AT THIE TIME THE H1AY 18
FEDERAL ELECTION A YEAR AGO * THIS WNTEEKEND. fYCOLAU
LAiNE BARNARD DEPUTISED FOR ME HERE IN G R EENt HI LLS AND
PROINISED THAT I WOULD BE BACK FOR THE OFFICIAL OPENING.
IAM GLAD THAT THE ELECTION RESULT WqAS SUCH THAT I WA S
ABLE TO IKEEP HIS PROMISE JUST ONE YEAR I-ATER. 21.. 
W. H EN I HEARD THAT DAW, 1N FRASER WOULD BE HER'PE
THIS EVEN ING TO GIVE A DEMONSTRATION SWIM1 ALONG ', I1TH
LAT ER AUSTFRALIAiN GLY," PIANS MIuKE ViENDENJ AIND YOUR O'WN'
WORLD P. EcOR50o YREAIKINGC GRAY,. I w,. As RE113N DED OF ONE
OF fMY EARLIEST DE-CISIONS AFTER BECOMING-10 PRIME 11IINISTER
I N DE CEMIB3E R 1972, FOR, A FEW DAYS * FHEHl, LtilicLE BAR\ 2i--D
AND I WIERE THE WHOLE CABI, 3NET, AND W'E DECIDED THAT THE
AUSTRAL IAN GO0/ V ENT WOUnLDj ENAB3LE DTwN jo . AVn; s--rL:
TO AMilERICA'S SPORTI., G 1HALL OF FAH. E I N FLORDIDA WHERE HER
AMAZN SWIMMIlNG PROWESS HAD ENTITLED HER TO A PLACE OF
HONOUR TH: FIRST AUSTRALIAN WOMAN O, 51 MAN SO HOi\ UREDL
IAM PROUD OF THAT DECISION.
TH. AT~ DECISIO0N WAS THEL-FIRST M,' ANIF: ESTATION OF
THE UNfDERTAKING I GAV'E IN OUR LABOR POLICY SPEECH FOR
T HE 1972 EL. ECTIONS,. NAMNELY THAT MY GO'VERNIMENT WOULD BE
THiE FIR'ST TO IMAKE DIlRECT GRANTS AV'AILABSLE FOR SPORTING
AND RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES. TALKING OF THE ISSUES
RAISED B'jY THE PROSPECT OF IN4CREAoSING LEISURE TIME, I
SAID ' FI[ HERE IS NO GREATER SOCIAL PROBLEM OF ALL MO] CDER-N
AND WNEALTH( COtiMUN ITI ES FOR SUCH URI AN ISED
NATION AS OURS,. THIS-MAY VERY WIELL BE THE PROBLEM1 OF
THE 19o80' s; SO WE 1M1UST PREPARE NOW PREPARE THE
GENERATION OF THE 80" S rHE CHILDREN AND YOUTH OF THE
TO BE ABLE TO ENJOY AND ENRICH THEIR GROWNING HOURS OF
LE ISURE" 3 
Tw/ vr I S THE DAI FOUR CONIT-ifT ASI THE REQ I ON
TAKIN\ G IN INEWCASTLE ANMD filAITLAND, Cr-SsNaC'. ANI) lUSViELL'-R0) K,
THE SIESOr: S INGLETON'l AND PA TrZICK PLAI'NS
LA !, E MA COUAR IE , DUNGOG A1ND) SOE A1: 1-( GLOUCESTE1 HIA S
DE'NEFITED FROlMl THIS POLICY,
tINDTRE .1974// 5 CAP IITAL AS sI STANCE PiROGRAMi
( AND 1NCk'lLUDIfNG IPOEMN RAN!\ TSC) A TOTAL OF $ 406, 500
HAS BEEN ALLOCATJiED TO THOSE CITIES AND SHIRESl~ l BY THE
AUSTRALIAN4 MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND RE--CREATION THIS IS
I N ADDI T ION1-TFHIE ! 3/, 0O0 DE AVAILA"' LE IN 1973/ 74,
Tins YEAR'S GRANTS OtCLUiDE $ LQ 00FO UCONsTRUc" rio1
ANDT. D! RE7SSI!\ NG: FACILITIES AT THE l[ iAITLAND OLY1MP1IC POOL;
W, 000 FOR THnE LUILDIN; G OF A t'U:-LTI-PURPO. SE SPORTING
AND ODC-AN ISA-TIONA L FACI LITY INi TH-E Du! t. 1; oe-SHIRE A-ND
$ 75,000 FOP. A SWMIGCOMPLEX AT CHAf LESTFO! AN IN THE
LAKE JIACQUAR IE SH IRE8 OTHIER. GRANTS HAVE GONE TOWARDS
IMPRO\ VING FACILITIES AT SPORTING, PICNIC AND CAMPING
SPOTS CATERlIN. G FOR THE WH!,-OLE CONJAUNITY.
TRUE, 14o FEDERAL GRANT WAS NM~. TOWARDS THIS
MAGN IF ICENT SPORTS CENTRE WNHICH IS A COMMERCIAL VENTURE
AVAILAB1' LE TO0 THE COM" MUNITY, AND ONE WHICH CANNOT BE
PRAISED TOO HIGHLYLl 
I IDiL: D THE PLAINN I NHG AllD OPERAT I ON OF TH IS COM;' PL-EX
MIAY 1E L. L PROV'IDE A LESSON FOR iN1UN IC IPAL I\ UY! lOPRI TI ES
CO NEM L AT NC AN YTfI ING S I IN IL A F OR THfiE IR AR E AS T HE
EMPHASIS KEEIS O. N, PROVIDING THE OPPORTUNIITY FOR PEOPL-[-E
OF AlL AGE--S T0 TAKEl AD j.( AZ TV7 OF SPORTING FACI LITI E--S
WHICOH, W, 1HILE MOT REU~ GTEArI1 PARTI CI PAION, STI LL
ENABLE PE-OPLEr-TO IKEE FPIT AND HEALHY'N MATTER HOW
FAR THllEY NIGHT BE FIRM TEAM SELIECTION STANADArNDS,
IN PAR MU ARLY -PLEASED, If N ITERNAT IONiAL ' NOMEN ' S YEr-AR,
TO INOTE THAT TH ETECATERS FOR ' NWMEN'S RECREA\ TIONAL
NEEDS BY THE PROVISION NOT ONLY OF SPECIAL CLASSES BUT
ALSO OF A CHILD MIN1IG ROOM TO MAKE ATTEND'AINCE AT SUCH
CASSMORE THAN PIlPE: DREAMI'j
To GET BA, 4CK TO FUiNDING,": FOR,") A lf11iGENT, PRIORITY
SIM'* PL-Y t-ULSTl GO IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO IBUILDIilG UPIN
MANY CSE HELPING TO PURCHASE THE LAND FOR PUB3LIC
SPORTS FACILITIES ' W!' iICH HAVIE LIMPED ALONG FOR SO 1AINY
YEAR'' S WITHOUT ASSISTANCE FROM 1EITHER STATE o r? FE DE': RA L
G ov miEvr-s, TL--vFPY IDEA OF HAVI! G SEPARATE DEPA. RTMENTS
OF TOURISM AND RECREATION RC'FC N N1QIEBY
THE WILDEST DREANIS OF GENTLE:-ME--N LIKEC-FlR. EDARJD CHARLES CLOSE
AFTER WHO1M THIS C-EN~ TPlz IS NAtM" ED, 
BuT-f SO0H; EON; AS AS HE 1VU\ S IN THE
DAY--' rO--DAY ADUN TxTO'] AID D!: YLVLOlP1I: N1' OF THiI S
AREA1 WAS THE 1( 1T NP OF P) ERSON WHOAl1 1C ENTURY LATER/
VIOULD HiAVE APPIREC JATED1 THE NFED TO ESTAD, L I SF1 COMUHI TY
CREKIOK' CETPES FO02 HIS PECLL
IT IS ENTIRELY FITTrING THAT THIS CEiNTRF SIHOULD
D~ E DEDICA* TL! hD TO TH E MORY OF THIS VERY SPECIAL PIONIEER,
IHA". VE G. REAT PLEASURE IN DECLAR''% ING OPEN TH-E , C CLOSE CENTPEI 
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE HUNTER REGION
AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
HUNTER REGIONAL COUNCIL FOR SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HAS
RECEIVED $ 29,000 OF $ 40,000 ALLOCATED TO THEM IN
1974/ 75 FOR ADMINISTRATION COSTS.
IN ADDITION $ 8,600 HAS BEEN PAID OUT OF THREE
ADDITIONAL GRANTS OF $ 12,000 PER ANNUM EACH FOR
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS APPROVED FROM 1/ 1/ 75,
LQCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE HUNTER REGION 1974/ 75
DENMAN SHIRE COUNCIL
DUNGOG SHIRE COUNCIL
GLoUCESTER SHIiR COUNCIL
GREAT LAKES SHIRE COUNCIL
GREATER CESSNOCK CITY COUNCIL
LAKE MACQUARIE SHIRE COUNCIL
MAITLAND CITY COUNCIL
MERRIWA SHIRE COUNCIL
MURRURUNDI SHIRE COUNCIL
MUSWELLBROOK MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
NEWCASTLE CITY COUNCIL
PATRICK PLAINS SHIRE COUNCIL
PORT STEPHENS SHIRE COUNCIL
SCONE SHIRE COUNCIL
SINGLETON MUNICIPAL COUNCIL 37,000 60,000
47,000 20,000
$ 342,000
$ 870,000
$ 228,000 26,000 18,000 70,000
$ 716,000 33,000
$ 130,000 62,000 60,000
$ 2,719,000 
RED SCHEIE
MAITLAND CITY COUNCIL PROJECTS APPROVED
GREEN HILLS LANDSCAPING
BROUGH HOUSE IMPROVEMENTS
BOLWARRA LOOKOUT
GILLIESTON HEIGHT PAVILION
JOHNSON RESERVE TOILET BLOCK
KERBS AND GUTTER ( 1)
HAROLD CRIGSON PARK LANDSCAPING
WOODBERRY COMMUNITY HALL
STREET NAME PLATES ERECTION
CLERICAL ASSISTANCE
KERBING AND GUTTERING ( 2)
PARK DEVELOPMENTS
CEMETRIES $ 15,680 4,450
$ 17,495
$ 21,900 6,086
$ 33,980 8,650
$ 99,000 3,140
$ 12,010
$ 56,780
$ 66,668
$ 44,350 
GRiANTS MADE~ B1 TDE DEPATM~ ENT OF
TOU0ItSM' AND J~ 2LATiW TO IRiGTION N I. E',
1 973 74 i ba~ nl Ae l2-. co Procz." am
Dungo{ gs re Basketha1ll and tennis
C ourts
Lake MaIo: quariu Sportin g f'i. elds Belmont
8&gt; i. _ c
Lah Macquarie Sj) 2tiflng filc9ds, Warners Bay
ShIre Tot al
1974/ 75 GrVwitalAss istaunee Pio ' iram ( inc: ui n g A 2,0( 0
30,000 5,000
37, 00')
10 j
Ncweasl City
Na: it: Land City
Greater Cessnock
City
Grcatcr Coss ' ock
C i ty
Singl elon
Municipal Shire
Hurrurunldi Shire
Mu rru junci Shire Swi: Lrni. ng cent: c at WaisI Coud
pools and arenitiecs
M': a: i. tlanid Oimp. c : ool
Ieconstruion and dresg i.
fuiaclIitiec3
Lighting Kurr. i spo: rts ground
Facitj.: Lics fCr St. o: rld
iiluthy's Sports Ground
AmelLti. t: es for James Cook Park
Amenities Warkworth Cricket
Ground fImrove fi: Ll. raton3 system
White Memorial. 1FPool
Purad. sc Park amenities and
itmprovement for picnicirig
Picnic faciii. lies and
amenit ies Norvil3 le Memor: ial: i
Park 73,000
' iO 7,500
15,000 30,000 8,000
30,000 8,000 / 2
I 
19 7AI 7Caia_ b per ' I~ y C!
Sco-neo r
Great bake ShII r'e
Groeat, * Lak! e ShI-Ire
Gloucester Shire . Dovrc-ow7-c) i of: Bury) aJn
B3u 14 of* e uI~ ros
C, c 1 1 Li Pg li o ;' ga z,. t o nal
fac i; U L
P. LWo sion oa to : 1 t fac : i. 1 s
a-t recr. ftiOn o. er'
Do veIopplant of li~ e ' cs
I~ oo 1 amndLdeoe aprit sof
rec jo ation Pa: i . Liesat
Gloucester District Park
Lake &gt; lacqiizric
S hi e C ~ I'm s t ompe t75 ,000
T ot1al 4/ 06, 500
OVERATLA TPOTAL 18, 000
70,000
15,000
15,( 00
15,000
4' 1500
A. rI-' tfj, 31 ud i. a1r: c
15ThIi2y1 
CHILDHOOD SERVICES PROGRAM
Capital Grants Approved
Maitland Nursery School ( extensions) $ 12,000
Singleton Pre School Kindergarden ( extensions)
Currie Currie ( new Pre School) $ 31,000
Recurrent Assistance 1974/ 75 till 31 March 1975
Staff Costs in Pre-School Centres
Maitland Nursery School
East Maitland Kindegarden
Catherine Child Care, East
Cessnock Kindergarden
Singleton Kindergarden $ 2,607
$ 4491
Maitland $ 7953
$ 6699 $ 28,000
$ 6285 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
ON THE OPENING OF LACHLAN VINTAGE VILLAGE,
FORBES, N. SXW 17 MAY 1975
1. SOMEONE HAS GOT THE IDEA THAT I'M INTERESTED IN
HISTORIC SITES AND OLD RUINS, THESE ARE THE BEST
SIMULATED RUINS I'VE SEEN IN AUSTRALIA, AFTER MY
LAST VISIT To EUROPE, I OPENED OLD SYDNEY TOWN AT
GoSFORD; AFTER MY. VISIT TO. JAMAICA I'M OPENING
LACHLAN VINTAGE VILLAGE.
2. I'M SORRY THERE AREN'T MORE STATE GOVERNMENT MINISTERS
AT THIS OPENING CEREMONY; AT LEAST ONE STATE MINISTER
DECIDED TO BOYCOTT THE OCCASION. ISUPPOSE THE
STATES ARE USED TO LIVING IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
ANYWAY. BOB HAWKE WANTED TO COME.. HE THOUGHT A
VINTAGE VILLAGE HAD SOMETHING TO DO WITH WINE TASTING.
3. THIS IS OUR BIGGEST TOWN PLANNING PROJECT SINCE
ALBURY-WODONGA. TOME UREN IS COMPLAINING THAT WE ARE
BUILDING MORE OLD TOWNS THAN NEW ONES.
1 MUST CONFESS THAT WHEN I WAS INVITED TO OPEN
" AUSTRALIA'S LIVING MUSEUM" I IMMEDIATELY THOUGHT OF
THE SENATE. I KNOW BEN HALL CAME FROM FORBES, BUT
THERE ARE QUITE A FEW BUSHRANGERS IN MY OWN
PROFESSION. 
CERTAINLY THE PEOPLE OF FORBES AND ALL AUSTRALIANS
CAN BE PROUD OF THIS SPLENDID AND IMAGINATIVE PROJECT,
IT WILL BRING GREAT DELIGHT TO TOURISTS, THE
COLONIAL HISTORY OF NEW SOUTH WALES IS RICH IN
INCIDENT AND ADVENTURE, THE OLD LACHLAN DIGGINGS,
THE ORIGINS OF AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURE AND THE
DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL TRANSPORT HAVE ALL BEEN
PAINSTAKINGLY RECREATED IN THIS DISPLAY, THE RESULT
IS A TRIBUTE TO THE SKILL OF BUILDERS, DESIGNERS,
WORKMEN, CRAFTSMEN AND TECHNICIANS OF THE DISTRICT,
6, THE COMPLETED VILLAGE WILL CONSIST OF 30 TO 40 HOUSES
MUSEUMS, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, SHOPS, BANKS INSURANCE
OFFICES, PERHAPS? IF COUNTRY PARTY MINISTERS WON'T
ATTEND AT LEAST THE AiMYLP, SHOULD BE HERE,
7, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS CONTRIBUTED $ 100,000
TO THIS PROJECT, IN ADDITION THE GOVERNMENT HAS
CONTRIBUTED $ 105,504 TO THE SCHEME THROUGH
GRANTS UNDER THE REDS SCHEME, THEREBY PROVIDING
ADDITONAL WORK IN THE FORBES DISTRICT,
8, I WISH THIS PROJECT EVERY SUCCESS, I KNOW IT WILL
ATTRACT MANY THOUSANDS OF VISITORS AND MAKE AN
IMPORTANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE ECONOMY AND PROSPERITY
OF THIS DISTRICT, IT WILL ALSO PRESERVE AN AUTHENTIC
FOLK TRADITION AND REMIND US OF THE ARCHITECTURE,
THE TRADITIONS AND THE LIFE-STYLES OF AN EARLIER
AGE, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
FOR A CIVIC RECEPTION IN
FORBES, NISW. 17 J'AY 1975
1, I AM DELIGHTED TO BE MAKING MY FIRST OFFICIAL VISIT
To FORBES, THIS CITY, BORN IN THE GOLDRUSH DAYS OF
THE 1860' s, IS NO W THE CENTRE OF A THRIVING
AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRY, LIKE SO MANY
TOWNS OF THE PERIOD IT RETAINS MANY OF THE BUILDINGS
AND MUCH OF THE CHARACTER OF ITS EARLY YEARS,
TOGETHER WITH THE SIGNS OF MODERN COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT$ a
2, FOR TOO LONG PEOPLE IN COUNTRY TOWNS HAVE BEEN PUTTING
UP WITH SERVICES AND AMENITIES INFERIOR TO THOSE IN THE
CAPITAL CITIES. THE LABOR GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED THAT
TOWNSPEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY WILL ENJOY A STANDARD OF LIVING
EQUAL TO THE BEST IN AUSTRALIA,
3. OUR OPPONENTS SEEM TO THINK THAT A GOVERNMENT'S
RESPONSIBILITY IN COUNTRY AREAS ENDS WITH THE FARMER,
THE MAN ON THE LAND,. CERTAINLY WE RECOGNISE THAT
PROSPERITY IN COUNTRY AREAS DEPENDS LARGELY ON A
PROSPEROUS RURAL COMMUNITY. AT THE SAME TIME, WE ARE
NOT GOING TO NEGLECT THE MILLIONS OF AUSTRALIANSEMPLOYEES
AND FAMILIES WHO LIVE IN TOWNS LIKE FORBES.
THEY DESERVE THE SAME STANDARDS OF EDUCATION, THE SAME
STANDARDS OF HOUSING, THE SAME OPPORTUNITIES FOR HEALTH
AND RECREATION As AUSTRALIANS IN THE MAJOR CITIES. 
-2-
ONE OF THE FIRST ACTS OF THIS GOVERNMENT WAS TO EMPOWER
THE GRANTS COMMISSION TO REC"~ END ASSISTANCE FOR LOCAL
AUTHORITIES. IN THIS WAY THE GRANTS COMMISSION WILL BE
ABLE TO ALLEVIATE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS, IN THE
SAME WAY THAT IT HAS ACTED TO REMOVE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN
THE STATES, IN ITS FIRST SET OF RECOMMENDATIONS, THE
COM1MISSION ALLOCATED MORE THAN $ 21 MILLION FOR LOCAL
COUNCILS IN NEW SOUTH WALES. FORBES MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
RECEIVED $ 90,000 FOR 197' 4-75,
UNDER THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS APPROVED ASSISTANCE TO THE
FORBES MUNICIPALITY AMOUNTING' TO $ 665,000 TO DATE.
SHIRES WITHIN THE FORBES DISTRICT HAVE RECEIVED
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE UNDER REDS TOTALLING $ 765,000,
6, No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE TO ALLEVIATE THE EFFECTS
OF NATURAL DISASTERS. WE ESTABLISHED THE NATURAL
DISASTERS RELIEF ORGANISATIONt WHICH HAS ALREADY
PROVED ITS VALUE BY ITS MAGNIFICENT WORK IN DARWIN
AND DURING THE BUSHFIRES LAST SUMMER IN NEW SOUTH
WALES. WE ARE ESTABLISHING THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INSURANCE CORPORATION TO PROVIDE INSURANCE COVER
AGAINST NATURAL DISASTERS AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE COST
TO HOUSEHOLDERS. MAJOR FLOODING OCCURRED IN FORBES
AND THE SURROUNDING AREA DURING AUGUST AND SEPTEMBER
LAST YEAR. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROVIDED $ 100,000-
ON A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR BASIS WITH THE STATE FOR RELIEF
MEASURES AND WILL GIVE FURTHER FUNDS FOR RESTORATION. s 9 ,/ 3 
7. RECURRENT GRANTS TOTALLING MORE THAN $ 101,000 HAVE
BEEN MADE SINCE JANUARY 1973 To 6 NON-GOVERNMENT
SCHOOLS IN FORBES PIARIST BROTHERS' COLLEGE/
OUR LADY OF NERCY COLLEGE, SACRED HEART INFANTS
SCHOOL; ST LAWRENCE PRIMARY SCHOOL AND LACH-HAVEN
SPECIAL SCHOOL.
8. THE M1INISTER FOR HEALTH HAS APPROVED A GRANT OF
$ 57,014 TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT TO
CONSTRUCT AND , EQUIP A SCHOOL DENTAL CLINIC AT
FORBES, THIS IS PART OF A PLAN FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE SCH~ OOL DENTAL SERVICE IN NEW SOUTH WALES,
FOR WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY
APPROVED MORE THAN $ 5.5 MILLION,
9. GRANTS To FORBES AND PARKES SINCE 1972 FOR AGED PERSONS
HOMES AND HOSTELS TOTAL $ 1,497,1711
As PART OF ITS PROGRAM TO IMPROVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, THE GOVERNMENT IS ESTABLISHING A
COMMUNITY HEALTH RESOURCES CENTRE TO SERVE FORBES/
PARKES, COWRA AND WEST WIYALONG. THE CENTRE WILL RECRUIT
AND MANAGE A TEAM OF NURSES AND OTHER HEALTH WORKERS
TO CARE FOR PEOPLE AND STAFF EXISTING BABY HEALTH CENTRES,
THE PROJECT HAS BEEN ALLOCATED $ 89,690 THIS FINANCIAL
YEAR. p 
-4-
11, SEVEN GRANTS TOTALLING MORE THAN $ 4,700 HAVE BEEN
MADE TO ARTS AND CRAFTS GROUPS IN THE FORBES AND
PARKES DISTRICT,
12. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE AVAILABLE
$ 53,000 IN GRANTS TO THE STATES FOR EXTENSIONS TO
HOUSES ON THE NANIMA RESERVE, WHERE MOST ABORIGINALS
IN THE DISTRICT LIVE. 



. QUEENSLAND BROADCAST.. NOI... 9 ( qy'
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION
LATELY ON RADIO AND TV AND IN THE NEWSPAPERS
THERE S BEEN A HIGHLY EXTRAVAGANT AND TOTALLY MISLEADING
CAMPAIGN BY THE INSURANCE COMPANIES AGAINST OUR PROPOSAL
FOR AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION, THE
AIR HAS BEEN THICK WITH CRIES OF NATIONALISATION,
SOCIALISM AND GENERAL DISASTER. LAST TIME WE HAD A
CAMPA. IGN OF THIS KIND, YOU LL REMEMBER, IT WAS THE DOCTORS
CRUSADING AGAINST MEDIBANK BUT AS SOON AS PEOPLE
REALISED THE TRUE BENEFITS OF ' EDIBANK THE WHOLE
CAMPAIGN COLLAPSED, SO I MAKE THIS PREDICTION: WHEN
PEOPLE uNDERSTAND WHAT OUR INSURANCE PROPOSALS REALLY
MEAN, THE CAMPAIGN BY THE JNSURANCE INTERESTS MANY
OF THEM FOREIGN OWNED WILL BE EXPOSED JUST AS
QUICKLY AS THE FALSE PROPAGANDA FROM THE DOCTORS, 
-2-
BASICALLY, WHAT WE ARE DOING IS ESTABLISHING A
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE COMPANY TO COMPETE WITH THE
PRIVATE INSURANCE FIRMS, YOU MAY ASK: WHY HAVE A
GOVERNMENT CORPORATION WHEN THERE ARE PLENTY OF
PRIVATE INSURANCE COMPANIES ALREADY PROVIDING A GOOD
SERVICE TO THE PUBLIC? THERE ARE TWO MAIN REASONS,
THE FIRST IS COMPETITION, THE MORE COMPETITION
GENUINE COMPETITION THERE IS IN ANY INDUSTRY,
THE BETTER THE SERVICE TO THE PUBLIC AND THE CHEAPER
THE RATES. THE SECOND REASON IS WIDER COVERAGE.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION
WILL BE PROVIDING INSURANCE COVER THAT CANNOT BE
OBTAINED FROM TH1-E OTHER COMPANIES, EITHER BECAUSE
THEY'RE NOT INTERESTED OR BECAUSE IT'S NOT
SUFFICIENTLY PROFITABLE,. ./ 3 
-3-
THE PEOPLE OF BRISBANE HAD THEIR OWN HARSH EXPERIENCE
OF THIS PROBLEM DURING THE FLOODS AT THE BEGINNING OF
LAST ? EAR. AT THE TIME OF THE FLOODS, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT ACTED PROMPTLY AND GENEROUSLY TO PROVIDE
RELIEF AND THE NECESSARY FUNDS FOR THE TASK OF REPAIR
AND RECONSTRUCTION. WE DIDN'T STINT ON THAT. BUT
THOUSANDS OF BRISBANE RESIDENTS FOUND THAT-THEIR
HOUSEHOLD POLICIES SIMPLY DIDN IT COVER THEM AGAINST
FLOOD DAMAGE., DARWI-N PEOPLE HAD THE SAME EXPERIENCE
AFTER THE CYCLONE LAST ClI11RISTi1AS, THE ONLY PEOPLE FULLY
COVERED IN THE FLOODS OR IN THE CYCLONE WERE THOSE
INSURED UNDER THE DEFENCE SERVICE HOMES SCHEME
ADMINISTERED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION WILL PROVIDE SUCH
INSURANCE FOR EVERYONE WHO NEEDS IT -AND PROVIDE IT
AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE COST. IT WILL OPEN THE WAY
TO MORE WIDESPREAD INSURANCE COVERAGE AGAINST LIVESTOCK
AND CROP LOSSES ARISING OUT OF NATURAL DISASTERS, SO IT
WILL BE OF PARTICULAR VALUE TO THE MAN ON THE LAND$ @ 9IA 
-4-
I DO ASK YOU TO IGNORE THIS ABSURD TALK ABOUT
NATIONALISATION, SINCE WHEN HAS IT BEEN
" NATIONALISATION" FOR GOVERNMENT ENTERPRISES TO
COMPETE FAIRLY AND ON EQUAL TERMS WITH PRIVATE
ENTERPRISE? THERE ARE MANY EXAMPLES OF SUCH
COMPETITION, H' 1O ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK ISN'T COMPETING FAIRLY WITH THE PRIVATE BANKS
AND NO ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE BANKS HAVE BEEN
NATIONALISED, No ONE SUGGESTS THAT THE AIRLINES
HAVE BEEN NATIONALISED BECAUSE TAA IS COMPETING WITH
ANSETT, IN EVERY CASE THE BENEFITS OF SUCH
COMPETITION HAVE BEEN PLAIN. FOR EXAMPLE, IT'S
CHEAPER TO INSURE YOUR HOUSE WITH THE COMMONWEALTH
SAVING BANK INSURANCE SCHEME THAN WITH ANY PRIVATE
INSURANCE COMPANY, IF THE COMINONWEALTH BANK CAN DO
THIS FOR ITS CUSTOMERS, WHY SHOULDN T THE SAME LOW.
PREMIUMS BE AVAILABLE TO EVERY HOUSEHOLDER? WE WANT
TO SEE THAT THEY ARE$ 
IT'S WORTH REMEMBERING THAT EVERY STATE
HAS HD A STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE
FOR MANY YEARS, AND VERY EFFICIENT ENTERPRISES
MOST OF THEM HAVE BEEN. HERE IN QUEENSLAND YOU HAVE
A STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE THE SGIO:
ITS BUILDING IS A PROMINENT LANDMARK IN BRISBANE.
I DON'T SUPPOSE EVEN MR BJELKE-PETERSEN WOULD
SUGGEST THAT INSURANCE IN QUEENSLAND HAS BEEN
NATIONALISED. THE FACT IS THAT UNDER THE
CONSTITUTION THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AS
MUCH RIGHT TO ESTABLISH AN INSURANCE CORPORATION AS
IT HAS TO ESTABLISH A BANK, IT HAS AS MUCH RIGHT
TO ESTABLISH AN INSURANCE CORPORATION AS THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS HAVE, ! O ONE TODAY WOULD DREAM OF
DISBANDING OR RESTRICTING THE OPERATIONS OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICES. THEY HAVE
SERVED THE PUBLIC WELL. THEY WILL CONTINUE TO DO
SO, / 6 
REMEMBER THIS: FOR ALL THEIR PATRIOTIC TALK,
A LARGE PART OF THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA
IS CONTROLLED DY OVERSEAS INTERESTS, LESS THAN
TWO YEARS AGO THE LEVEL OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP OF
GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS CONDUCTED IN AUSTRALIA
WAS NEARLY 46%. A GREAT DEAL OF AUSTRALIAN MONEY
IS BEING CHANNELLED TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES, I KNOW
THERE ARE SOME GREAT AUSTRALIAN FIRMS, AND I PAY
TRIBUTE TO THEM; BUT AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
INSURANCE CORPORATION WILL HELP REDUCE THE FLOW OF
FUNDS OUT OF AUSTRALIA AND COULD WELL ENCOURAGE MORE
MONEY INTO AUSTRALIA, GENUINE AUSTRALIAN-OWNED
INSURANCE COMPANIES HAVE MUCH MORE TO FEAR FROM
GRO'ING FOREIGN COMPETITION THAN THEY HAVE FROM
COMPETITION FROM AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CORPORATION.
WE'VE MADE IT PERFECTLY CLEAR THAT ACROSS THE GREAT
RANGE OF ITS BUSINESS, THE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION WILL BE OPERATING ON EXACTLY THE
SAME COMMERCIAL AND COMPETITIVE LINES AS THE REST OF
THE INDUSTRY, ANY SUGGESTION THAT IT WILL BE GIVEN
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE IS SIMPLY UNTRUE. UP TO NOW, THE
UNFAIR ADVANTAGE HAS BEEN WITH THE PRIVATE COMPANIES,
THEY HAVE' LAVISHED FUNDS ON EXPENSIVE OFFICE
BUILDINGS AND IN SPECULATIVE REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPN. ThTS; THEIR INVESTMENT IN HOUSING LOANS HAS
FALLEN STEEPLY, A LARGE PART OF THEIR FUNDS HAS GONE
OVERSEAS; AND IMPORTANT FIELDS OF INSURANCE IAVE BEEN
NEGLECTED, 
-7-
REMEMBER THESE FACTS NEXT TIME YOU SEE YOUR
PREMIUMS BEING WASTED ON COSTLY AND MISLEADING
ADVERTISING, AIMED AT A GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION THAT WILL PROVIDE MUCH NEEDED
COMPETITION, AND A COMPREHENSIVE INSURANCE COVER
FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS WHO NEED IT, 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME fIINISTER,
FOR THE ANNUAL DINNER OF THE
BRISBANE DEUTSCHER TURN-VEREIN,
BRISBANE, FRIDAY 23 MAY 1975
1. ONE OF THE GREAT FEATURES OF MIGRANT LIFE IN AUSTRALIA,
IS THE STRENGTH OF ETHNIC SOCIAL CLUBS AND OTHER
COMMUNITY GROUPS. IN EVERY CITY I VISIT I FIND
FLOURISHING MIGRANT ORGANISATIONS, CLUBS, SPORTING
GROUPS AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE NEWSPAPERS. I HAVE SPENT
MANY HAPPY HOURS AMONG ITALIANS, GREEKS, GERMANS
AND OTHER NATIONALITIES IN SURROUNDINGS SUCH AS THESE.
EVERYWHERE THE ATMOSPHERE IS WARM AND THE HOSPITALITY
IS EXCELLENT,
2. I SOMETIMES FEEL MORE AT HOME WITH THE GERMAN COMMUNITY
IN QUEENSLAND THAN I DO WITH THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY.
I KNOW YOUR PREMIER IS OF NORTHERN EUROPEAN EXTRACTION,
BUT HE HAS NEVER INVITED ME TO DINNER. THE ONLY TIME
I INVITED HIM TO DINNER HE DECLINED TO ATTEND.
3. I KNOW YOU WILL BE HAPPY TO BE REMINDED THAT I WAS IN THE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY ONLY FOUR MONTHS AGO, I
HAD TALKS WITH CHANCELLOR SCHMIDT IN BONN AND PAID
VERY HAPPY VISITS TO THE CITIES OF COLOGNE AND HAMBURG,
I WAS ABLE TO REMIND MY HOSTS OF THE GREAT CONTRIBUTION
MADE BY GERMAN MIGRANTS TO AUSTRALIA AND OF THE STRONG
ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL LINKS BETWEEN US. I WAS THE SECOND
AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC
THE FIRST SINCE SIR ROBERT FiENZIES IN 1959. s o s/ 2 
-2-
4, GERMANS WERE AMONG THE VERY FIRST PEOPLE TO SETTLE IN
QUEENSLAND, A GROUP OF GERMAN MISSIONARIES ARRIVED
IN THE MORETON BAY DISTRICT IN 1838. THEE WERE
SENSIBLE ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT MORETON BAY IN THOSE
DAYS WAS PART OF NEW SOUTH WALES, THE STATE GOVERNMENT
WAS PROBABLY MORE PROGRESSIVE THAN THE ONE YOU HAVE NOW,
SHORTLY AFTER THE ESTABLISHMENT OF QUEENSLAND AS A
SEPARATE COLONY I N. 1859' -THE COLONIAL GOVERNMENT
-I SUPPOSE WE COULD : STILL CALL, IT THE COLONIAL GOVERNMENT
BEGAN TO ENCOURAGE IMMIGRATION FROM EUROPE. AT . THE
: FIRST QUEENSLAND CENSUS IN 1861 THE COLONY HAD 2124
SGERMAN-BORN PEOPLE.' TODAY THERE ARE ROUGHLY 10,000
QUEENSLANDERS BORN IN GERMANY, THE 1971 CENSUS ALSO
SHOWED THAT APPROXIMATELY 31,000 QUEENSLANDERS HAD EITHER
ONE OR BOTH PARENTS BORN IN GERMANY.
6, IN RECENT YEARS THERE HAVE BEEN STRONG CULTURAL CONTACTS
BETWEEN GERMANY AND AUSTRALIA, THE STUTTGART BALLET
HAS COME TO AUSTRALIA AND THE SYDNEY SYMPHONY
ORCHESTRA HAS PLAYED IN GERMAN CITIES. VERY MANY GERMANS
HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THE ARTS, SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY
IN AUSTRALIA, S../ 3 
-3-
7, GERMAN-AUSTRALIAN CONTACTS GO BACK TO THE VERY
BEGINNING OF AUSTRALIA. GOVERNOR PHILLIP'S
FATHER WAS A GERMAN; A GERMA. SURVEYOR, THEODORE
ALT, SAILED WITH PHILLIP iN THE FIRST FLEET;
FREDERICK BRECKER, REGARDED AS THE FATHER OF THE
QUEENSLAND MERINO, STOCK, SETTLED IN QUEENSLAND IN
THE EARLY 19TH CENTURY: THE EXPLORER AND
NATURALIST, LUDWIG LEICHARDT, MIGRATED FROM GERMANYIN
1842; GERMANWINEMAKERS ARE FAMOUS IN AUSTRALIA";'
SKARL RASP CAME TO AUSTRALIA IN 1869, DISCOVERED
" SILVER, LEAD AND ZINC DEPOSITS AT BROKEN HILL, AND
FOUNDED A SMELTING COMPANY WHICH WAS THE FORERUNNER.
OF B. H. P.
8. CLUBS SUCH AS YOURS ARE KEEPING ALIVE THIS
GREAT TRADITION OF FRIENDSHIP AND INTERNATIONAL
UNDERSTANDING. IT IS GOOD TO BE AMONG YOU AND
TO SHARE YOUR CONFIDENCE IN OUR COUNTRY AND ITS FUTURE, -a' 



QUEENSLAND BROADCAST NO.
THE ENVIRONMENT MAY 1975
ON FRIDAY I ANNOUNCED A MOST IMPORTANT
DECISION BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROTECTION
OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF. THE GOVERNMENT HAD BEFORE IT
THE REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSIONS WHICH WERE APPOINTED,
YOU'LL REMEMBER, IN 1970 TO CONSIDER THE PROBLEM
OF OIL DRILLING ON THE REEF. THAT REPORT MADE IT CLEAR
THAT WE ARE STILL VERY MUCH IN THE DARK SCIENTIFICALLY
SPEAKING ABOUT THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF OIL ON
THE REEF AND ITS ORGANISMS. I DON'T WANT TO OVERSIMPLIFY
WHAT ARE REALLY COMPLEX MATTERS,, BUT IT'S FAIR TO SAY
THAT THERE IS. STILL ROOM FOR DOUBT ABOUT THE DEGREE OF
RISK WHICH OIL DRILLING WOULD POSE. Two OF THE THREE
ROYAL COMMISSIONERS FELT THAT WITH CERTAIN SAFEGUARDS
AND PRECAUTIONS, DRILLING COULD BE SAFELY PERMITTED IN
CERTAIN AREAS AROUND THE REEF, THE CHAIRMAN OF THE INQUIRY,
MR JUSTICE WALLACE, FELT THAT THIS WOULD BE TOO GREAT
A RISK TO TAKE, HIs OPINION WAS THAT NO DRILLING AT ALL
SHOULD BE ALLOWED NEAR THE REEF UNTIL WE DISCOVER MORE
ABOUT ITS LONG-TERM SCIENTIFIC EFFECTS. THE GOVERNMENT
CONSIDERED ALL THESE VIEWS, WE DECIDED ON FRIDAY THAT
WITH A NATURAL ASSET AS PRICELESS AS THE REEF, WE WOULD
NOT BE JUSTIFIED IN TAKING ANY CHANCES. WE ACCEPTED
THE MORE STRINGENT VIEW. OF THE COMMISSION'S CHAIRMAN. WE
HAVE THEREFORE DECIDED THAT THERE SHOULD BE NO DRILLING IN
THE AREA OF THE REEF UNTIL MORE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE IS
1-41A 
-2-
FOR US, THE PRESERVATION OF THE REEF IS PARAMOUNT
I HAVE ALREADY WRITTEN TO MR BJELKE-PETERSEN EXPLAINING
OUR DECISION IT WAS CERTAINLY TIME FOR SUCH'DECISIVE
ACTION. I DON'T NEED TO REMIND YOU OF THE LONG HISTORY
OF WRANGLING BY OTHER GOVERNMENTS WHICH LED UP TO OUR
DECISION. IT STARTED FIVE YEARS AGO, WHEN MR GORTON
WAS PRIME MINISTERS HE TOO WAS CONCERNED ABOUT OIL
DRILLING ON-THE REEF DRILLING PERMITTED AND
ENCOURAGED BY THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. IT WAS MR
GORTON'S AGITATION AND I GIVE HIM CREDIT FOR IT
WHICH LED TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSIONS
BY THE QUEENSLAND AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS, BUT MR
GORTON WASN'T JUST CONCERNED ABOUT THE REEF. HE TOOK THE
WIDER-VIEW SUPPORTED BY MY PARTY THAT ALL OFF-SHORE
AREAS, THE WHOLE CONTINENTAL SHELF AROUND AUSTRALIA, WAS
THE PROPER RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT,
NOT THE STATES. e/ 3 
-3-
THE REASONS FOR THIS ARE SIMPLE ENOUGH:
THE OFF-SHORE AREAS LIE OUTSIDE OUR LAND BORDERS; THEIR
DEFINITION INVOLVES QUESTIONS OF FOREIGN RELATIONS;
AND MOST OFF-SHORE ACTIVITIES, SUCH AS MINING AND MINERAL
EXPLORATION, AFFECT NOT ONLY THE ENVIRONMENT BUT OUR
TRADE AS A NATIONS So THE GORTON GOVERNMENT IN
APRIL 1970 BROUGHT IN LEGISLATION TO BRING THESE AREAS
UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, WELL,
THERE WAS A GREAT HOWL FROM THE MINING INTERESTS AND
STATE-RiGHTERS, AND MR GORTON'S SENSIBLE MEASURE WAS PUT
IN COLD STORAGE. THE LIBERALS IN CANBERRA. WENT TO WATER.
WHEN WE CAME IN WE REINTRODUCED THE LEGISLATION; THE
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT PROMPTLY CHALLENGED IT IN THE HIGH
COURT, WE ARE STILL WAITING FOR THE COURT'S JUDGMENT. THAT'S
FAIR ENOUGH; BUT MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HAS BEEN USING HIS
COURT CHALLENGE TO TRY AND HOLD UP ANOTHER POSITIVE
MEASURE TO PROTECT THE BARRIER REEF. WE WON'T GO ALONG
WITH THOSE TACTICS. THIS WEEK, IN THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, WE
INTRODUCED A BILL TO CREATE A GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE
PARK. IT'S A MAGNIFICENT SCHEME; IT WILL ENSURE THAT THIS
SUPERB AREA,* THIS UNIQUE PART OF AUSTRALIA'S NATURAL
HERITAGE, WILL BE SAFEGUARDED FOR ALL TIME. WE TOLD THE
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT THAT WE WOULDN'T ALLOW THEIR COURT
CHALLENGE TO DELAY THE BILL, WE SAID WE WOULD PREFER TO
COOPERATE IN A JOINT AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER THE MARINE
PARK WITH QUEENSLAND, BUT IF THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT
WOULDN'T COOPERATE WE WOULD GO AHEAD ON OUR OWN, ONCE
AGAIN, THE FUTURE OF THE REEF WAS PARAMOUNT TO US. 
THOSE ARE JUST TWO OF THE INITIATIVES
WE HAVE TAKEN TO SAFEGUARD THE ENVIRONMENTS THEY ARE
AREAS IN WHICH WE HAVE CLEAR CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS, OR
ARE CONVINCED OF OUR POWERS. WHERE WE HAVE THE POWER WE
HAVE ACTED PROMPTLY1 WE HAVE POWER IN THE TERRITORIESAND
IT'IS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY THAT MOST OF OUR
URANIUM IS MINED. HERE WE HAVE IMPOSED STRICT
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS ON URANIUM MINING BEFORE IT
STARTS1 AND HAVE APPROVED FULL LAND RIGHTS FOR THE
ABORIGINAL PEOPLE. WE ALSO HAVE POWER OVER-THE
EXPORT OF-MINERALS, WHEREVER THEY ARE MINED. THE PREVIOUS
GOVERNMENT REALLY ONLY CONCERNED ITSELF WITH THE
EXPORT OF. URANIUM AND IRON ORE. ONE OF OUR FIRST ACTS
AS A GOVERNMENT WAS TO ASSUME-FULL CONTROL OVER THE
EXPORT OF AU.. MINERALS. WE DID THIS FOR A NUMBER OF
REASONS NOT JUST ENVIRONMENTAL ONES -AND ONE RESULTO
THANKS LARGELY TO THE WORK OF REX CONNOR AND HIS
DEPARTMENT, HAS BEEN TO QUADRUPLE THE EARNINGS FROM THE
EXPORT OF QUEENSLAND COALS 
WHEN IT COMES TO ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
WITHIN~ THE STATES, WE HAVE SOUGHT RESULTS BY AGREEMENT
WITH THE STATES OR BY BRINGING IN LEGISLATION WHICH THE
STATES AGREE TO SUPPORT. THAT'S NO EASY TASK. AWAY
BACK IN APRIL 1973 MORE THAN TWO YEARS'AGOIFIRST
WROTE TO THE PREMIERS SEEKING THEIR COOPERATION
IN PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT WHENEVER THEY REQUESTED
FEDERAL FUNDS FOR STATE GOVERNMENT PROJECTS. IN
JANUARY LAST YEAR 16 MONTH -S AGO WWR OTE AGAIN TO THE
PREMIERS$ I SUGGESTED A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, WE
WANTED SOME PROCEDURE FOR JOINT ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRIES
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES. IT'S
SURELY ABSURD TO HAVE TWO INQUIRIES INTO THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT OF A* PROJECT WHEN ONE WILL DO, THE RESPONSE FROM
THE STATES WAS FRANKLY DISAPPOINTING1 BUT THAT DIDN'T
STOP ME FROM ACTING ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROJECTS
WHICH FALL WITHIN OUR OWN RESPONSIBILITY. ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT INQUIRIES HAVE BEEN STANDARD PRACTICE FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE THE BEGINNING OF LAST YEAR. S,
LEGISLATION. TO MAKE THESE PROCEDURES COMPULSORY WAS
PASSED IN DECEMBER, FROM NOW ON, EVERY PROJECT AFFECTING
THE ENVIRONMENT WHETHER MINING1 BUILDING, OR
DEVELOPMENT WILL BE SUBJECT TO THE MOST SEARCHING
SCRUTINYS 
-6-
IT'S ONLY WHEN WE GET THESE MATTERS INTO
PROPER PERSPECTIVE THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND WHAT
HAPPENED WITH FRASER ISLAND. LET ME BE QUITE CLEAR
ABOUT THIS: NOTHING WE DO CAN STOP THE MINING ON
FRASER ISLAND. THE MOST WE CAN HOPE TO DO IS PREVENT
THE EXPORT OF MINERALS THAT ARE ALREADY MINED, THE
QUESTION WAS WHETHER WE COULD DO THAT LEGALLYOR
HONOURABLY. DON'T IMAGINE THAT THIS PROBLEM
SUDDENLY TOOK THE GOVERNMENT BY SURPRISE A COUPLE
OF WEEKS AGOi ALMOST A YEAR AGO, MY MINISTERS,
wMR CONNOR AND DR CASS AGREED -AND I ACCEPTED THEIR
ADVICE -THAT WHEREVER POSSIBLE THE GOVERNMENT
SHOULD.-USE ITS POWERS OVER MINERAL EXPORTS TO
DISCOURAGE MINING OPERATIONS WHICH COULD DAMA GE THE
ENVIRONMENT. ONCE AGAIN IT WAS ON 9 JULY LAST
YEAR -IWROTE TO THE PREMIERS POI NTIN G OUT OUR
CONCERN, AND STRESSING THAT ENVIRONMENTAL SAFEGUARDS
WOULD BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT WHEN FUTURE APPLICATIONS
FOR MINERAL EXPORTS WERE CONSIDERED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
MR BJELKE-PETERSEN TOOK SIX MONTHS TO REPLYo AND THERE
IS STILL NO AGREED PROCEDURE ON THE NECESSARY.
ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRIES. a17 
-7-
I ASK YOU TO REMEMBER THAT MINING HAS BEEN
GOING ON ON FRASER ISLAND FOR YEARS, THE PRESENT
MINING LEASES WEREN T APPROVED BY US THEY WERE
APPROVED YEARS AGO BY MR BJELKE-PETERSEN HIMSELF.
THAT'S ONE REASON WHY THERE HASN T BEEN A WORD OF
CRITICISM BY THE LIBERALS OR THE COUNTRY PARTY OF THE
MINING ON FRASER ISLAND. WHEN WE CAME TO OFFICE THE
MINING COMPANIES ALREADY HAD THEIR LEASES; THEY HAD
ENTERED INTO FIRM CONTRACTS, AND THEY HAD THE RESULTS
OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRY BY THE QUEENSLAND
GOVERNMENT WHICH GAVE ITS BLESSING TO THE SCHEME, SUBJECT
TO PRETTY STRINGENTSAFEGUARDS. THE WHOLEOPERATION WAS
PERFECTLY LEGAL. SOME SAY WE COULD STOP THE EXPORT
OF MINERALS NOW BY MAKING ' OUR LEGISLATION
RETROSPECTIVE, BY SAYING " THIS RULE WON'T JUST APPLY
IN FUTURE, WE RE GOING TO APPLY IT TO PAST CASES AS WELL$
-WE'RE GOING TO KNOCK OUT MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WORTH
OF MINERAL CONTRACTS ALREADY MADE IN GOOD FAITH."
WE WEREN'T PREPARED TO DO IT$ WHAT WE ARE DOING IS
MAKING. SURE THAT FROM NOW ON, ALL FUTURE MINING OPERATIONS
WILL BE CAREFULLY STUDIED FOR THEIR EFFECT. ON THE
ENVIRONMENT. DR CASS HAS ANNOUNCED A FULL ENVIRONMENTAL
INQUIRY INTO THE WHOLE FUTURE OF FRASER ISLAND TO HOLD
THE LINE AGAINST ANY FUTURE DAMAGE. 
-8-
WE HAVE ACHIEVED GREAT THINGS ON THE
ENVIRONMENT AND YOU CAN BE SURE WE WILL PRESS ON
WITH OUR PROGRAM AS VIGOROUSLY AS EVER. THAT
PROGRAM WILL MOVE AHEAD MORE QUICKLY WITH A
LITTLE LESS HYPOCRISY FROM THOSE WHO DID NOTHING,
DURING 23 YEARS IN GOVERNMENT, TO PROTECT OUR
NATURAL HERITAGE.
I 



ONE
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E, G. WHITLAM, M, P.
TO THE FEDERATED MUNICIPAL AND SHIRE COUNCIL EMPLOYEES'UNION
26 MAY 1975
No GROUP OF AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES HAVE HAD GREATER
RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED UPON THEM THROUGH-THE POLICIES
OF MY GOVERNMENT THAN EMPLOYEES IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT. EQUALLY,
NO GROUP OF AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYEES HAVE HAD THEIR OPPORTUNITIES
MORE ENHANCED THAN THOSE EMPLOYED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT$
IN ACCEPTING YOUR INVITATION I ACKNOWLEDGE THIS, ACKNOWLEDGE
OUR DEBT AND AFFIRM OUR MUTUAL OPPORTUNITIES. THE POLICIES
OF THIS GOVERNMENT CANNOT SUCCEED WITHOUT YOUR CO-OPERATION,
IN A VERY REAL SENSE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES
ARE THE FRONT-LINE TROOPS IN OUR BATTLE TO PROMOTE THE
QUALITY OF LIFE IN AUSTRALIA'S CITIES AND REGIONS, AND TO
PROMOTE EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS. FRONT-LINE TROOPS MUST,
OF COURSE, EXPECT TO COP A GREAT DEAL OF THE FLAK, WE CAN
* ALL ANTICIPATE IN THE COMING MONTHS A STRENGTHENING OF THE
ATTACK ON THE GROWTH OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR, ON THE SO-CALLED
BLOATED BUREAUCRACY. " THESE ATTACKS ALWAYS HAVE ONE AIM
TO DIVIDE THE COMMUNITY, TO BUILD'UP RESENTMENT AGAINST
PUBLIC INITIATIVES,_ TO DEPICT-THE WORKFORCE AS BEING COMPOSED
OF TWO MUTUALLY HOSTILE SECTORS THE WORKERS VERSUS THE
DRONES. FOR THE PURPOSE OF THAT PARTICULAR EXERCISE,
THOSE PAID BY GOVERNMENT FEDERAL, STATE OR LOCAL ARE
DEPICTED AS THE DRONES. THIS COMPARTMENTALISATION IS
ESSENTIALLY PHONEY. IT IS IMPOSSIBLE, IN TERMS OF PRODUCTIVITY
OR SOCIAL WORTH, TO DRAW A DISTINCTION BETWEEN EMPLOYEES IN
THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND THOSE IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR. 
-1A7
ACCORDING TO THE FALLACY OF PRIVATE WORTH VERSUS PUBLIC
WASTE, THE CLERK IN ONE OF THE 110 PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS
IS ECONOMICALLY PRODUCTIVE WHILE THE CLERK DOING EXACTLY
THE SAME WORK THROUGH MEDIBANK IS A BLUDGER. THE PRIVATE
BUS OPERATOR PRODUCESJ THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT WORKER IS
A PARASITE. THE BREWERY WORKER CONTRIBUTES TO THE
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT; THE WATER BOARD MAN DOES NOT.
THE SHIRE ENGINEER IS IN SOME WAY A LESS USEFULj,, LESS
PRODUCTIVE CITIZEN THAN A PRIVATELY-EMPLOYED ONE,
OF COURSE THIS ' IS ALL SO MUCH NONSENSE. 
-2-
ECONOMICALLY AND SOCIALLY, THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND
THE PUBLIC SECTOR ARE INTERDEPENDENT. No MODERN COMMUNITY
CAN SENSIBLY OR MEANINGFULLY DRAW A SHARP DISTINCTION
BETWEEN THE PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROVISION OF GOODS AND
SERVICES, WHOEVER PRODUCES OR PROVIDES THEM. IN MODERN
COMMUNITIES, THE PROVISION OF SERVICES, EVEN MORE THAN
THE PRODUCTION OF GOODS, DETERMINES THE REAL LEVEL OF
A COMMUNITY S WELFARE AND A FAMILY S STANDARD OF LIVING.
AND INCREASINGLY THOSE SERVICES MUST BE* PROVIDED BY THE
COMMUNITY ITSELF, OR THEY WILL NOT BE PROVIDED AT ALL,
WHO WOULD NOW ARGUE THAT THE PRODUCTION OF PRIVATE CARS
WAS A MORE ACCURATE OR MORE RELEVANT MEASURE OF
PROSPERITY THAN THE QUALITY OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT? WHO
WOULD NOW ARGUE THAT A SUBURBAN HOME STOCKED WITH
EVERY GLITTERING MODERN APPLIANCE WAS SATISFACTORY IF'IT
LACKED THE BASIC AMENITY OF SEWERAGE?
I SET OUT THE BASIS OF AN APPROACH IN THE
POLICY SPEECH OF 1972 IN THESE TERMS:
" EVEN-THE MOST ENLIGHTENED AND EQUAL APPROACH
TO SOCIAL WELFARE CAN ONLY SCRATCH THE SURFACE OF THE
BASIC PROBLEM OF EQUALITY AND WELL-BEING OF MOST OF OUR CITIZENS$
WE CAN DOUBLE AND TREBLE SOCIAL BENEFITS, BUT WE CAN NEVER
MAKE UP THROUGH CASH PAYMENTS FOR WHAT WE TAKE AWAY IN
MENTAL AND PHYSICAL WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL COHESION THROUGH
THE BREAKDOWN OF COMMUNITY LIFE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITY. 1-1/ 3. 
-3-
INCREASINGLY, A CITIZEN'S REAL STANDARD OF LIVING, THE
HEALTH OF HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY, -HIS CHILDREN'S
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EDUCATION AND SELF-IMPROVEMENT, HIS
ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES, HIS ABILITY TO
ENJOY THE NATION'S RESOURCES FOR RECREATION AND CULTURE,
HIS ABILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DECISIONS AND ACTIONS
OF THE COMMUNITY ARE DETERMINED NOT BY HIS INCOME, NOT
BY THE HOURS HE WORKS, BUT BY WHERE HE LIVES. THIS
IS WHY . LABOR BELIEVES THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT MUST
INVOLVE ITSELF DIRECTLY IN CITIES AND CENTRES WHERE
MOST PEOPLE LIVE,"
THE MAJOR INSTRUMENT FOR THE PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION
OF THAT PHILOSOPHY IS LOCAL GOVERNMENT. WHAT IS NOW
UNDERWAY IS A TRANSFORMATION OF THE ROLE OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND CONSEQUENTLY A TRANSFORMATION OF THE ROLE
OF LOCAL* GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES. OON'T FORGET AND DON'T
O LET THE PUBLIC FORGET THAT WHEN BUSINESS, AND THE PRESS
ATTACK THE BUREAUCRACY, THEY ARE NOT JUST AIMING AT THE
CANBERRA PUBLIC SERVANTS; THEY'RE AIMING AT YOU AND YOUR
FELLOW-MEMBERS AS WELL. IN FACT IN 1974-75 THE FASTESTGROWING
SEGMENT OF THE PUBLIC WORK-FORCE WAS NOT THE
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE BUT EMPLOYMENT THROUGH LOCAL
GOVERNMENT. THE GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE
WAS THE LOWEST OF THE THREE FEbERAL, STATE AND LOCAL. 
-4-
FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT FROM MARCH 1974 TO MARCH 1975
INCREASED 4.8 PER CENT, STATE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT
BY 6,4 PER CENT AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT BY
11,4 PER CENT, I SHOULD POINT OUT THAT THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT FIGURE SIGNIFICANTLY REFLECTS THE OPERATION
OF THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME, THE
FIGURES DO, HOWEVER, EXPLODE THE MYTH OF UNCONTROLLED
GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE,
I SHOULD FURTHER POINT OUT THAT ONE OF THE
MAJOR FACTORS DETERMINING THE RATE OF GROWTH OF
THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE IS THE NEED TO RECRUIT
STAFF TO PLAN AND OPERATE PROGRAMS DIRECTLY RELATED
TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES, THIS GOES MUCH
FURTHER THAN THE CREATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE CITIES
COMMISSION AND THE NEW INVOLVEMENT OF THE GRANTS
COMMISSION IN REGIONAL AFFAIRS, A GREAT NUMBER OF
FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS ARE NOW WORKING DIRECTLY WITH
STATE AND LOCAL GOVENMENT TO DEVELOP A WHOLE. RANGE
OF NEW LOCAL PROGRAMS; INCLUDING SOCIAL SECURITY,
HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR AND IMMIGRATION, ABORIGINAL
AFFAIRS, TOURISM AND RECREATION, TRANSPORT, AND
HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION, 
THIS EXPANSION OF ACTIVITIES HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH
CENTRALISM. IT DOES MEAN VASTLY EXPANDED. OPPORTUNITIES
FOR CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE THREE LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT
AND A VASTLY ENHANCED ROLE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT. WE
HAVE SOUGHT TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A GENUINE PARTNER
IN AUSTRALIA'S FEDERAL SYSTEM,
WHEN As LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY
IBEGAN TO BR ING LOCAL QUESTIONS TO THE CENTRE OF THE
NATIONAL DEBATE I WAS SAID TO BE DEMEANING BOTH THE
DEBATE AND MY SELF, REMEMBER THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
THOUGHT IT HILARIOUS THAT A NATIONAL LEADER SHOULD
SUGGEST, FOR I NSTANRE, THAT SEWERAGE WAS A-NATIONAL
QUESTION. MY APPROACH WAS AND IS THAT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT MUST ACCEPT A GREATER INVOLVEMENT IN A WHOLE
RANGE OF MATTERS WHICH WERE ONCE DEEMED TO BE THE SOLE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE OR OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
THAT IS-NOT BECAUSE OF ANY BELIEF IN THE INHERENT
SUPERIORITY OF CANBERRA. IT IS SIMPLY THAT UNDER THE OLD
APPROACHj. THE SERVICES WHICH A MODERN COMMUNITY NOW
REQUIRES SHOULD BE PROVIDED THROUGH ITS ELECTED
REPRESENTATIVES WERE EITHER PROVIDED INADEQUATELY
OR NOT AT ALL, WERE FINANCED INADEQUATELY AND UNFAIRLY,
OR NOT AT ALL, IT IS NOW INEVITABLE THAT THE NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT SHALL ACCEPT INCREASING RESPONSIBILITY TO
FINANCE THESE FUNCTIONS AND SERVICES FAIRLY AND ADEQUATELY.
WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TRIED TO DO IS TO CREATE
THE INSTITUTIONS AND MACHINERY, AND TO APPOINT THE MEN AND
WOMEN WHEREBY THIS INEVITABLE GROWTH OF RESPONSIBILITY
CAN BE DISCHARGED EFFICIENTLY AND FAIRLY. 
-6-
THE GREAT OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO EXPAND OPPORTUNITIES AND
EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES BETWEEN REGIONS, THE MAJOR
INSTRUMENT IN THIS TASK IS THE GRANTS COMMISSION. THIS
YEAR $ 56 MILLION HAS BEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO 806 LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES UNDER RECOMMENDATION MADE BY THE
COMMISSION, I MENTIONBRIEFLY SOME OTHER NEW PROGRAMS WHICH
DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY PROVIDE NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUR MEMBERS. LAST YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 28 MILLION UNDER OUR
NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM. THIS YEAR THE ESTIMATE IS
$ 108 MILLION AND THE PROGRAM. HAS BEEN EXTENDED TO TOWNS
WITH A POPULATION OF MORE THAN 10,000,
FOR THE. FIRST TIME WE HAVE MADE URBAN LOCAL
ROADS ELIGIBLE FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN. GOVERNMENT,
THIRTEEN'AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS COSTING $ 14 MILLION
ARE NOW OPERATING.
THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION AND
OTHER AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENTS SUCH AS DEPARTMENT OFURBAN
AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ARE CONSULTING AT LOCAL LEVEL ON
THE RECREATIONAL NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE. 
-7
OUR GRANTS PROGRAM HAS MADE A START TOWARDS MEETING THOSE
NEEDS. WE HAVE THIS YEAR ALLOCATED $ 2.25 MILLION FOR
GRANTS FOR LOCAL TOURIST ATTRACTIONS AND FACILITIES. WE
ARE ESTABLISHING ADVISORY COMMITTEES FOR CONSULTATION WITH
LOCAL GOVERNMENTo REGIONAL TOURIST ORGANISATIONS AND
INDUSTRY REPRESENTATIVES TO PLAN REGIONAL TOURIST DEVLEOPMENT1
WE HAVE EXPANDED THE PROGRAM OF LOCAL OWNERSHIP OF
AERODROMESS LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS PARTICIPATED IN THE INTERIM
PROGRAM FOR PRE-SCHOOL AND CHILD-CARE SERVICES. ABOUT
HALF OF THE 122 CAPITAL PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN THROUGH OUR
CHILD-CARE PROGRAM WERE SPONSORED BY LOCAL.. GOVERNMENT BODIES.
WE HAVE MADE AVAILABLE MORE THAN $ 3k MILLION
IN DIRECT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHOR ITIES FQLR
ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT IN THE PAST YEAR. MOST OF THAT
WAS ALLOCATED UNDER THE SPECIAL WORK PROJECTS SCHEME
ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES.
WE HA VE COOPERATED CLOSELY WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THROUGH THE CREATION OF THE REGIONAL COUNCILS FOR SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN. II I 
-8-
THE LEGISLATION FOR THE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH
SERVICES COMMISSION PROVIDES FOR THE COMMISSION TO
MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS AFTER CONSULTATIONS WITH THE STATES., THE
COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM AND THE COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTHI
ALCOHOLISM AND DRUG DEPENDENCY PROGRAM, BOTH INTRODUCED
IN 1973, PROVIDE FOR DIRECT GRANTS TO* LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ORGANISATIONS, LOCAL GOVERNMENT NOW HAS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO PARTICIPATE DIRECTLY IN THE PROVISION OF A WIDE RANGE
OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND FACILITIES AT THE COMMUNITY
LEVELI WHERE IT9 PARTICIPATION CAN BE MOST EFFECTIVE, 
p THROUGH ALL THESE AND OTHER PROGRAMS, WE ARE
STRIVING TO EXPAND AND EQUALISE OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL
REGIONS AND AS BETWEEN REGIONS. IT IS NOT ONLY A MATTER
OF IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF LIFE FOR ALL CITIZENS, FOR
ALL PEOPLE LIVING IN AUSTRALIA, WHEREVER THEY LIVE IN
AUSTRALIA THOUGH THAT IS THE BASIC AIM. THESE PROGRAMS
WILL INEVITABLY PROMOTE THE OPPORTUNITIES OF YOUR
MEMBERS, NOT JUST FOR EMPLOYMENT, BUT FOR MORE REWARDING,
MORE SELF-SATISFYING EMPLOYMENT. WHEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
WAS TREATED AS THE CINDERELLA OF GOVERNMENT, WHEN
LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS POORLY FINANCED AND LOWLY REGARDED,
ALL THOSE ASSOCIATED WITH IT, AND EMPLOYED THROUGH IT,
PAID A PRICE IN SALARY AND WAGES AND IN PUBLIC
ESTEEM. THIS IS NOT ENDED YET: THERE IS STILL A
LONG WAY TO GO. MUT UNTIL LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS A
GENUINE, A FULL AND COMPLETE PARTNER IN THE FEDERAL
SYSTEM,. THOSE EMPLOYED AT THAT LEVEL WILL SUFFER..
THE FACT IS THAT STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES HAVE
BEEN LOUSY EMPLOYERS. THIS IS THE PRINCIPAL REASON WHY
MOST STRIKES THE MOST FREQUENT STRIKES, THE WORST
STRIKES, THE LONGEST STRIKES OCCUR IN THE GREAT SERVICE
INSTRUMENTALITIES AND AMONG EMPLOYEES UNDER THE GREAT
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES, STATE OR LOCAL. IN RAISING THE
LEVEL AND PRESTIGE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND SEMI-GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HOPES, NOT ONLY
TO PROMOTE THE QUALITY OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE, BUT TO MAKE IT
POSSIBLE FOR THOSE PUBLIC AUTHORITIES TO GIVE THEIR OWN
EMPLOYEES AS GOOD CONDITIONS, AS GOOD REMUNERATION, AS
GOOD OPPORTUNITIES, AND AS GOOD A CHANCE FOR A DECENT,
FULFILLING OCCUPATIONAS ANYJEPLOYEES IN AUSTRALIA. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT SWEDISH TELEPHONE LINK-UP
ON MONDAY, 26TH MAY, 1975
I'm to open Swedish Technical Week, but that's not what is
worr ying me it is this phone call which I have to take
immediately I have opened the Week.
I sometimes have the feeling, I suppose all of you do, that
when you are making phone calls, somebody may be listening in.
Well, on this occasion, I know they are,-hundreds of you.
Of course, this means that the phone call will have to be
exceptionally discreet and formal. I hope you will pardon
me because really on the telephone, I'm quite relaxed ordinarily,
quite forthcoming, quite natural. This is not the real me that
you will hear on the phone.
It gives me very great pleasure to open Swedish Technical Week,
because there is no country in the world, whose model my
Government has sought to emulate in so many respects. I suppose
I must confess to being a little ideologically prejudiced.
The Swedish Government is formed by a fraternal party of my own.
It's been in office for over 40 years, yet Sweden is one of the
most complete democracies in the world a vigorous contest
between political parties and we've won for over 40 years.
Of course, naturally, I want to emulate the Swedish example.
But let me be completely dispassionate in this matter. Let
me just look at the facts and the statistics. When the Swedish
Social Democrats came to office in the early 1930' s, Sweden
statistically was the poorest country in Europe. It would be
invidious to mention the countries which are now regarded as
the poorest in Europe, but which at that time, had a higher
average per capita income than did the Swedes. Now, by any
tests, Sweden has the highest per capita income in Europe.
It is probably the richest country in the world. I believe the
conclusion to be drawn is obvious. The society is fair, the
economy has been transformed. And it has . come about, I believe,
because the Swedes have concentrated on their strengths. They
are naturally an educated, healthy people, a real democracy,
complete freedom of parliamentary and media exchanges. At the
same time, they have concentrated on those natural resources
where they are strongest. They are very rich in minerals, and
one only has to look not only at the income that the Swedes
derive from the export of minerals, but also look at the income
they derive, the employment they secure, from the processing
of minerals and not least, the whole of the metal skills upon
which so much of their reputation in the world is based. In
every respect, the raw materials, the basic industries, the
crafts and designs, the Swedes excell. 
d f
2.
Inevitably, in these circumstances, they have built up a
very healthy trade with Australia. So often when people
visit Australia, they say the trade balance is very much
in Australia's favour. I have to point out that the trade
between Australia and Sweden, the trade balance, is immensely
in Sweden's favour much more in Sweden's favour than the
trade balance is in Australia's favour with any country in
the world. But I don't resent that, I don't object to it.
Minister Bengtsson has pointed out the close ties which have
developed between our two countries in the last two years.
I suppose you could say the last two years and five months
to be precise.
Nobody would say that I haven't tried to visit Sweden! It0
was about six years since I made my first visit there and
try as I might, I couldn't extend my mission to Europe over
last Christmas and January,, to include Sweden. But I couldn't
restrain my Ministers from visiting it. I think more of my
Ministers have visited Sweden than have visited any other0
country quite a record I can assure you. In so many
international gatherings, we confer with the Swedes, whether
it is in economic, or social, or diplomatic issues, we study
in every case, what the Sweddes'are doing, or what they have
done and they have been very good colleagues indeed. It's a
delight to have Minister Bengtsson here again. We appreciate
any visits from him. The Swedes have an extraordinarily fine
Public Service, an extraordinarily fine diplomatic service
and we have the Ambassador and a distinguished Minister here
with us today. Moreover, there are a very great number of
Swedish businessmen and Australian businessmen visiting
Australia in this Swedish Technical Week.
I don't know when the phone call is coming through, but I
suppose to make it available and to take this call, to beS
formal and discreet, I had better get this informal part over,
and I now declare Swedish Technical Week 1975 in Melbourne,
Australia, open. 
TELEPHONE LINK-UP DISCUSSION
Mr. Whitlam: The trade balance between our two countries
is very much in your favour.
Mr. Palme: Yes, but the important thing is that it will
expand both ways, I hope.
Mr. Whitlam: I'm sure it will.
Mr. Palme: Really, our contacts have developed in a very
capable way in all spheres during the last few years.
Mr. Whitlan: They have indeed.
Mr. Palme: We-are very happy for that.
Mr. Whitlam: I must say that I was sorry that I couldn't
extend my European visit, 5 months ago, to Sweden, but I
want to express my appreciation to you and your Ministers
for your hospitality to so many of my Ministers, who, whenever
they're within a thousand miles of Sweden, make sure that they
visit Sweden.
Mr. Palme: In the first place, we are looking forward to
seeing you in the future. I remember we met at a restaurant
here in Stockholm.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes
Mr. Palme: Six or seven years ago.
Mr. Whitlam: When you were the heir apparent to Erlander.
Mr. Palme: I just returned from Vienna a couple of hours
ago, where I met two friends of yours, Willy Brandt and H. Schmidt,
and they both extend their best wishes to you. I understand
that Willy Brandt has also talked to you over the phone once,
to Australia.
Mr. Whitlam: Yes he did, last year. But it was not so refined
a technique as this where we are speaking on telephones. In
that case we-were on television. We were picked up by television
sets, but here, of course, we are onEricsson telephones.
Mr. Palme:
to year. So the technical development proceeds from year 
Mr. Whitlam: I was happy to be able to see Willy Brandt
last January in Bonn and, of course, found him in excellent
spirits and we have some hope that he may be visiting Australia
next year.
Mr. Palme: He mentioned that. He was looking forward to it.
We were discussing particularly, the present situation in the
world and in Europe. Naturally the fact that the unemployment
is so large, the OECD area is causing us very great concern,
but we are hoping that there will come some up-turn later in
the year, which would be very beneficial.
Mr. Whitlam: We hope so, because all the countries at this
stage of development that the OECD countries are, big ones
and medium sized ones like Sweden and Australia, have these
terrible twin problems of unemployment and inflation. But
it looks as if the position is improving steadily, although
slowly, in all our countries.
Mr. Palme: I believe so. The important thing is to tie it to
the development of the United States. As long as they lag
behind, it will be difficult, but there is a hope that there
will be a change this year.
Mr. Whitlam: They seem to have changed their policies in
order to relieve the unemployment.
I would like to assert to you, face to face, how much my
Government has appreciated working with your Government
and its representatives in international bodies in the last
two and a half years. We find ourselves ' on the same wavelength
in so many social and economic and diplomatic issues, and
whenever we are deciding a course of action we shall take
as Australians in any of these bodies, we ascertain what the
attitude of the Swedish Government will be.
Mr. Palme: May I immediately reciprocate, because whatever
the field is, whether it be the environment, or in disarmament
questions or in the General Assembly or in the Security Council
in the United Nations, we always have the same experience that
our representatives can work very much on the same lines. And
I feel that it is important that countries of our size try to
both take an active part to show solidarity in all the international
affairs.
Mr. Whitlam: We are not so large that other countries suspect
our political motives or fear our economic power. They can
believe that what we are trying to do is, in fact, good
international relations, fraternal relations.
Mr. Palme: In my contacts around the world, I see more and
more that this type of cooperation of the medium sized and
smaller countries is wanted, not least in the many countries 
of the Third World that now are finding their rightful
places. Mr. Whitlam: Well, of course, Australia is surrounded by
developing countries, countries of the Third World, countries
which in the last generation, or in the case of Indo-China,
within the last couple of months, have achieved independence,
and, accordingly, we are very much aware of the needs of
developing countries for trade as well as aid, and that
they need to have international self-respect. We applaud
the efforts that Sweden has taken under your Government and
Mr. Erlander's Government in this respect in Indo-China,
the attitude you expressed politically and also -the assistance
that you have given with aid and rehabilitation. It's been
a noble precedent and we try to emulate it.
Mr. Palme: Your position is very important. Just because
you are in the region where there are many countries of the
Third World, where you have much more first-hand contact than
many other countries have. In this international cooperation,
I think what we are doing right now is important because there
is in many places, a reaction against technical development
and against the advances of industrial society. This can be
understandable when technology leads to undesirable social
results, but on the other hand, one must never forget that
it is the technical development that has allowed our countries
to come up from poverty and misery and to create welfare for
our peoples. Therefore, we had to control technology, and
also give it the possibility to develop for the benefit of all
countries and for mankind, and I think it is important to stress
this in the modern world..
Mr. Whitlam: In our area it is true that in many of our
neighbour countries, there is some revulsion against advanced
technologies because they have often increased the distance
between the people in office or in power, through whose hands
the new techniques pass, and the rest of the population. It
would be a tragic result if higher techniques increased the.
disparities, the inequalities in the developing societies.
Nevertheless, as I was saying to this gathering at this
function in Melbourne, it is by concentrating on its strengths,
that a country like Sweden in the course of just over 40 years,
has come from the poorest country in Europe to the richest
country in the world the smallest per capita income to the
largest. You have concentrated on your strengths and it is
something that we aim to copy in Australia. You have preserved
democracy, you have a welfare state and you have a thriving
mixed economy.
Mr. Palme: I don't think you need to copy anything because
really, you are following the same path with a very developed
industrial economy on a mixed economy basis and the extended
welfare for the people. We can thus, because we are on the
same level of development, learn a lot from each other, in the
social fields and the labour market field, and many others., 
6.
So we are really learning much from you and I see my colleagues
are very eager to come over there and discuss with your
people.
Mr. Whitlam: We have Mr. Bengtsson . of course, with us today.
Mr.. Palme: I hope he behaves.
Mr. Whitlam: We haven't got these two-way Ericsson telephones
on him the whole time, but I believe so. Both as Environment
and as Labor Minister, he is a very good colleague. My
colleagues in these fields have shared experiences with him
to our advantage and he seems to enjoy it too.
Mr. Palme: Last year we had Mr. Cameron. I had a long
discussion with him. I suppose you see him often. Would
you give him my regards.
Mr. Whitlam: I see him constantly. He is constantly on
radio talk-back programmes. If he were on a programme like
this, there would be no holding him! I will tell him that
you remember him and that you speak so kindly of him. Thank
you very much for your reference to him.
Mr. Palme: I hope that this Technical Week will be of
some interest to you . and show you what we are trying to
develop in this very small country. We try to specialise
in certain things.
Mr. Whitlam: I'm most glad that Swedish technology has
brought us face to face again. I hope that it will not be
too long before you, in my country, or I, in your country,
can speak face to face without scores or hundreds of people
watching us. It's very good for my Government to be working
so closely with your Government in so many fields and I have
very much appreciated the opportunity of speaking to you
face to face again through the Swedish technology and the
opening of Swedish Technical Week-in Australia.
Mr. Palme: I really look forward to seeing you again in
person in my country and I'm glad that technology gave us
this chance of ' a preview of our future meeting.
Mr. Whitlam: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.
Mr. Palme: MTr. h aPlnmek: you, goodbye. 



THE PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THlE LAUNCHING OF
' THE AUSTRA\ LIAN CONSTITUTION' BY GEOFFREY SAWYER
ON MONDAY, 26TH MAY, 1975
I suppose I have been brought in to launch this book to
direct some attention to it and I'm very happy to fulfil
that purpose. I'm certain that anybody looking at the
book will find it interesting. It will be accessible to
a degree that very few books can be accessible because it
is being published by the Australian Government Publishing
Service and it will be available at all its outlets. It will
not only be accessible, it will be stimulating.
Geoffrey Sawyer is one of the most scintillating of our
academics. I w-. as first exposed to him getting on in the*
middle ' 50' s, when I was sitting on the Constitution Review
Committee of the Federal Parliament both Houses, both sides
of each House. There were very many distinguished witnesses
who gave their views and the one whose views I remember most
dazzlingly, was Geoffrey Sawyer.
There are a great number of academics these days who write
for the newspapers and particularly for the Fairfax press.
It's no compliment to say that Geoffrey Sawyer is the best.
Some of the others are fallible in proportion to -their dogmatism.
I've never known professors to be so unfailingly in error.
But Geoffrey Sawyer is better than most. He is certainly as good
as any. This is not patronising. One has to remember that
judges don't agree and their word is final. How many unanimous
decisions do you get from the High Court? In recent years we
have learnt how the Privy Council, of course, wasn't unanimous
always. A lot of things must have been decided by majority.
So if judges can disagree, there is no shame i~ n academics also
disagreeing and being wrong because the judge is only right if
he is in the majority. For all that, this book will be accessible,
it will be stimulating.
The important thing is that we should encourage people to
know the framework within which all the Australian Parliaments
have to operate. We are one of -the very few federal systems
in the world and we are the most litigious of them all. There
is West Germany, United States, Canada and Australia. There
are other federal systems, India, Mexico and Brazil and so on,
but one never really finds there the constitutional contests
in the courts such as you find in the three English speaking
federations and you don't find them in West Germany either.
I wish people would read the Constitution and see what it says.
I've had some people in the States just blowing their heads,
they are just beside themselves with outrage when anybody
suggests that perhaps we should take some responsibility for
seeing that there is a trafficable road between Sydney and
Melbourne. That's always been in the Constitution trade
and commerce between the States. True, at the time the thing
was written there weren't motor-cars and people, of course, 
wouldn't go the whole of that distance in a horse and dray,
but there are roads now, and people do travel between Sydney
and Melbourne, but they can't do it on the road provided.
Nov, what is unreasonablie in using the trade and commerce
among the States it's perfectly feasible, right from the
beginning.
Again, I wish -they'd read what is said about hospitals. It
w,. as regarded as utterly outrageous, provocative arnd irresponsible
for me to suggest that if in large centres of population, such
as outer suburbs, which of course have larger popula-t-ions than
any country towns, any provincial centres except Newcastle,
-that if they haven't got hospitals provided by the States,
then the Australian Government could provide the hospital.
This was absolutely unheard of but since 1946 we have always
been able to provide medical services.
As it turned out, they disturbed themselves in the States
and they have now laid a few foundation stones. But I just
give you those practical examples. People do want to travel
between Sydney and Melbourne by road, people do want to have
hospitals near where they live, or are injured or are confined.
If the roads or the hospitals are not adequate, there's nothing
to say that the Federal Governizent shouldan't provide them.
One of the things which distresses me, of course, is how
negatively people regard these things. I don't mind the
limitations in the Federal Constitution on federal action
in terms o. f civil liberties or human rights, such as they
are there. I thnk it is monstrous that the provision providing
for jury trial has been by-passed by a shabby dodge but,
nevertheless, it meant well jury trial for serious crimes.
And again, acquisition of property on just terms. I don't cavil
at those at all, but nobody ever seems to think why shouldn't
the same things be applied to the States in the Constitution?
We had a Constitutional convention about 18 months ago, and
out of its deliberations people suggest that there should be
acquisition on just terms provided in the territories. Of
course there should be.. Nobody seemed to -think there should
be in the States too. What's the use of having a safeguard
like that which is applied only partially. It should be made
universal. Defective as the safeguard! of jury Lrial is under
federal criminal law, it should be tidied up but it should
also apply no less to State criminal laws. I wish people
would look at these things in a more basic way, in a less
conservative, restrictive and negative way.
Of course, the constitutional provisions are always taking on
new aspects. It's happened only a year ago. For -the first
time there was a double dissolution on several Bills. The
previous double dissolution had been on a single Bill. We
had them on six Bills. The currenit rate is over a dozen. 
For the first time after a double dissolution, -the Bills
had to be rejected a third time so there was a joint sitting,
the first that ever had been. For the first timn, lasL May,
there were some referendums on another Provision of the
Constitution which said that if the Senate twice rejected
referendums, then Bills, then they could be put to the peop.* Ie
willy-nilly. The Senate can prevent a Bill being passed but
i~ t cannot prevent a referendum being put. Of course, the
Constitution is always taking new forms.
I want to pay tribute to the High Court and the way it has
developed it. It has done much more than the people ever
have at referendums. I was referring to the Constitution
Review Committee report in the late ' 501s. An am-tazing degree
of unanimity was reached there. There were never any of
our recommendations which were supported by fewer
than 11 of the 12 members. Most of them were unanimous. It's
only last year that it was found that there were objectionable
features about some of them. But in the meantime, some of the
provisions in our report have come about. We were much agitated
about the limitations of -the National Parliament's power over
civil aviation. Under the external affairs power, we now have
it, coupled with the import power. No, the Federal Parliament
doesn't need to amplify its civil aviation powers now it's got
them. Again, we were concerned about television which, naturally,
was not contemplated -in 1900 when the Constitution was drawn up.
Nobody worries that we haven't in the Federal Parliament, now
got jurisdiction over television. We were agitated about trade
practices. In the light of the concrete pipes case, the
corporation's power, we can effectivel~ y deal with trade practices.
So, one way or another, things develop.
I do urge that people should read the Constitution. A lot
of people think that if something is not used, that -there's
something improper about it. Take the Interstate Commission
an emminently reasonable body. But because it hadn't been
used for over half a century, people think that there must be
something improper about bringing it to pass. In the United
States, they would never think. of abandoning it. In West
Germany and Canada, they now have similar bodies. And so one
could go on. B~ ut I wish people would just be rational enough
to look at the Constitution; not just look at it in a restrictive
and negative, a cussed way, but to see what can be done if ii:
i. s necessary or desirable or preferable to do something. There
are very considerable shortcomings in it. A great amount can
be done by cooperation between the Federal and State bodies,
but at least one needs -to be clear where each of them stands
under the Constitution.
While I'm immensely flattered by what the Minister has said
about me, I suppose in many ways, all I can claim is that I
brought a lot of these m-atters to a head. I've made the
Parliameznt face up to them. I've made the State Parliaments
and Governments face up to them and I am trying to exercise
them internationally as well. 
One of the most fascinating things about this book of
Geoffrey Sawyer's is that it makes the whole subject live
in human and political terms. I naturally regard political
terms as essentially human. That may have an elemet of
rationalisation about it. But, the Constitution was, in
terms of British colonies at the end of last century, a very
bold initiative. Most of the other Federal Constitutions in
the world have come about as a result of external pressures.
That was the case in America, in Canada and West Germany.
They have arisen from successful national liberation movements
or unsuccessful wars and the newly emancipated colonists have
resorted to federal systems or the banquished have resorted to
federal systems or had them imposed upon them. We did it,
largely, voluntarily. While I suppose you can say in retrospect,
the horizons were those of colonial politicians at the time, yet
nevertheless, there can be no doubt of the vigour of the debate
which took place. Of course the book is well illustrated. The
next edition ought to be still better illustrated, with some
of these fascinating cartoons here. It's one form of art or
controversy in which Australians have always been innovative
and excellent. But between us, the Australian Government
Publishing Service, Geoffrey Sawyer and the current Government,
I suppose constitutional matters will continue to be exciting
for quite some time. There can be no question that the public
is more interested in politics than it has been for 40 or
years. The 1920' s or 1.930 was the last time that there was
the interest in politics in Australia that there is at the
moment. If you are to understand Australian politics, you have to
have some acquaintance with the Australian Constitution.
With a scintillating author and a pretty good lawyer, we
now have the material readily accessible and I'm certain
people of all ages and all conditions, will be better and
wiser through reading ' The Australian Constitution' written
by Geoffrey Sawyer and published by the Australian Government
Publishing Service. I'm very happy now to launch it. 



NATIONAL GALLERY BILL 1975
SECOND READING SPEECH
BY
THE HONOURABLE E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
PRIME MINISTER
The purpose of the Bill is to establish an Australian
National Gallery in the national capital to develop, maintain
and exhibit a national collection of works of art and to
provide an art focus for the whole Australian community.
Like the Australia Council Bill, this is another
historic initiative taken by the present Government to promote
interest and activity in the arts in Australia. Our intention
to introduce this legislation was announced in the
Governor-General's Speech at the opening of Parliament on
27 February 1973 and again in the Speech by Her Majesty
The Queen on 28 February 1974. Our commitment was reiterated
in the Policy Speech for the 1974 election and confirmed in
the Governor-General's Speech on 9 July 1974.
Honourable members will be aware of my longstanding
interest in a National Gallery and the Hansard record of my
questions over many years stands testimony to my concern
about the growth of our national collection of works of art.
I shall not dwell on the chequered history of the
idea of a National Gallery but it is worth remembering that it
is as old as the master plan for the national capital itself.
Provision for it appeared in the list of requirements prepared
for competitors submitting designs for the future city and
Walter Burley Griffin in his own plan allowed for two such
institutions. For a time the idea was obscured by depression, war
and the other great forces which were reshaping Australian
society; but the vision was not lost and it was the force
and vigour of Sir Daryl Lindsay, in particular, which once
more brought it to the fore./ 2 
On 10 September 1965 the then Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, announced the establishment of a National
Art Gallery Committee of Inquiry under the Chairmanship of
Sir Daryl Lindsay. The Committee's report was presented to
the new Prime Minister, Mr Holt, on 14 March 1966. Mr Holt
tabled it and paid tribute to it in a ministerial statement
on 1 November 1967. The report recommended as the basis for
all else that the Gallery be given statutory authority. The
committee suggested that construction of the gallery might
commence when the National Library was due for completion
during 1968 and hoped that the opening of the gallery in 1970
would be a fitting means of recognising in the National Capital
the 200th anniversary of the discovery of eastern Australia
by Captain Cook.
On 26 October 1971 the then Prime Minister,
Mr McMahon, announced his Government's intention to legislate
for a permanent Council as a statutory body to administer the
Gallery. He also announced at that time his Government's
intention to appoint Mr James Mollison as the Gallery's
first director. The design of a Gallery building was entrusted to
Edwards, Madigan, Torzillo and Briggs Pty. Ltd., architects
and town planners of Sydney. A contract for construction of
the building was issued by my government in April 1973, and on
7 November of that year I unveiled a foundation plaque
commemorating the beginning of construction on the banks of
Lake Burley Griffin nearby.
A fine gallery building is not, however, an end in
itself. In the final analysis, an institution is judged by what
it offers and how effectively it does this, and in large measure
this will depend upon the soundness of the principles on which
it is based and the quality of the people who run it. / 3 
The Australian Government believes that the
National Gallery Bill 1975 represents the best basis devised
to this time for such an institution in our kind of society.
It will be an independent statutory authority in
many respects similar to the National Library of Australia.
It will be responsible for the national collection of works
of art and be expected to make the most advantageous use
of the collection in the national interest.
The affairs of the Gallery will be conducted by
a Council, including the Director of the Gallery, and not
more than 10 other members chosen with regard to their
knowledge and experience with respect to the visual arts
or other areas of knowledge relevant to the affairs of the
Gallery. It is in mind that there should always be a
proper blend of the artistic and other interests most likely
to optimize the effectiveness of the institution.
A novel feature of the Bill is that it provides
for two statutory offices, the Director of the Australian
National Gallery and the Secretary and Manager of the Gallery.
The Director shall have overall responsibility to the Council
for the running of the Gallery and its artistic direction,
and the Secretary and Manager shall, under the Director,
manage the day-to-day administration of the affairs of the
Gallery and act as secretary to the Council. This provision 
has been introduced to avoid the problems which have arisen
so often elsewhere, where unlikely and unreasonable
combinations of different expertise and experience have been
demanded of the one person, usually with unfortunate results.
It is hoped that by this means there will always be a proper
complement of artistic and administrative skills with the
most satisfactory use being made of what each office-holder
is best able to offer.
The Gallery will engage its own staff on terms
and conditions determined by the Council but subject to
the approval of the Public Service Board. This measure of
flexibility is seen as essential to allow the Gallery to
obtain the services of the best professional staff available
whether in Australia or overseas, whether from other
galleries or from universities or other areas.
In its financial affairs the Gallery will operate in
much the same way as most other statutory authorities. It will
be required to submit estimates to the Minister in the
normal way and it will be funded by annual appropriation.
It will operate its own bank accounts, but it will be required
to keep proper accounts and records of its affairs which will
be subject to inspection and audit by the Auditor-General. It
will also prepare annual reports to the Minister which will
be tabled in Parliament. 
I shall not go into other features of the Bill here;
I believe that altogether they will ensure the proper control
and accountability of one of the ration's important cultural
institutions, while at the same time providing the vital
elements of independence and flexibility which the institution
requires to achieve the greatest measure of effectiveness.
Much has been said over the last year or two about
some of the Gallery's acquisitions of contemporary art from
overseas. On balance, I think this has been for the good.
Many art-interested Australians have been obliged to reconsider
some of their values and tastes and I believe that this is a
salutary experience for us all every once in a while. I
should like to remind honourable members, however, that the
Gallery's collection is indeeed not confined to contemporary
art from overseas. In the view of the Director, the Gallery possesses
close to the finest, balanced collection of Australian art
anywhere in the country and it is virtually complete to this
time. It is building a fine collection of primitive art
based primarily on Pacific and African cultures. It is not
neglecting the arts of our neighbours in Asia and the Far
East nor the early civilizations of South America. The
Gallery is assembling a major collection of graphic arts,
and it already possesses the very fine Felix Man collection
of lithographs tracing that art form from its very origins
to recent times. A great sculpture collection is also being
developed. / 6 
6.
No Australian artist of importance has been
neglected, and names like Constantin Brancusi, Alexander
Calder, Honore Daumier, Auguste Rodin and Giambattista Tiepolo
should leave no doubt that the Gallery is seeking the best
of more than one period or place.
We have here the beginnings of an institution which
it is my hope, and the Government's, will be a source of
pleasure and artistic stimulation for generations of
Australians to come, a worthy addition to our growing national
heritage, and an endeavour in which we might all take pride.
I commend the Bill to the House.
I 



ADDRESS Y THiE PRIME ' IllISTER
11 IEi1 O N. E. G. ' iiTLVI, 1l., P. " 1
TO T! E APIA CLU3, SYD'EY
SUNDAY 1 JUNE 1975
IT IS JUST OVER A YEAR SINCE I ATTENDED A GALA DINNER
IN SYDNEY OF THE APIA CLUB. IN AGAIN PAYING TRIBUTE TO APIA, I AGAIN PAY
TRIBUTE TO THE ENTIRE ITALIAN COMMUNITY, TO THE ENTIRE MIGRANT COMMUNITY,
TO ITALY HERSELF, TO EUROPE AND OUR EUROPEAN CONNECTION. NOT ONLY DOES
APIA PROVIDE A VITAL FOCUS FOR THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY THE LARGEST
SINGLE GROUP OF NON-BRITISH MIGRANTS IN AUSTRALIA IT PROVIDES A
LIVING SYMBOL OF AUSTRALIA'S LINKS WITH EUROPE. MORE THAN ANY OTHER
SINGLE ORGANISATION YOUR CLUB HAS COME TO REFLECT THE STRENGTH, THE
IMPORTANCE, THE DURABILITY OF AUSTRALIA'S RELATIONSHIP WITH ITALY, HER
MAINFOLD LINKS WITH THE OLD , CRLD AND ALL THOSE WHO HAVE COME TO US
FROM THE OLD WORLD," I REJOICE ON THE PARTICULAR OCCASION THAT BRINGS US
TOGETHER TODAY. IT IS AN HONOUR TO BE WITH YOU TO OBSERVE THE 19TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE PROCLAMATION OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC. 2 JUNE 19l6
SAW THE FINAL STEPS IN THE RESTORATION OF ITALIAN DEMOCRACY. ITALIANS
VOTED IN A REFERENDUM FOR A REPUBLIC; AT THE SAME TIME THEY HELD THE
FIRST ELECTIONS FOR A CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY, WITH THE OVERTHROW OF
FASCISM ITALY REBUILT HER DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS WITH SPEED AND VIGOUR. 
/ 7 2-
I FOR ALL THE DIFFICULTIES THE WESTERN NATIONS H/ VE
FACED SINCE THE SECOND W½ fORLD WAR FOR ALL THE GREAT ECONOMIC,
SOCIAL AND MILITARY CRISES THE CONTINENT HAS ENDURED THE
FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN ITALIAN DEIOCRACY HAVE SURVIVED. CN
THOSE FOUNDATIONS WAS BUILT THE GREAT POST-WAR MIGRATION PROGRAM
TO AUSTRALIA ONE OF THE BIGGEST PLANNED MOVEMENTS OF POPULATION
IN ALL HISTORY. THE HSTORY OF ITALIAN MIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA IS FAMILIAR
TO ALL OF US, THERE ARE FEW COUNTRIES WITH WHICH AUSTRALIA HAS
HAD A LONGER CONTACT, THESE CONTACTS GO BACK MUCH FURTHER THAN
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MODERN REPUBLIC; FURTHER EVEN THAN THE
ESTABLISHMENrT OF APIA: WE KINOW THERE WAS AiJ ITALIAN ON THE
ENDEAVoL. V,-HEN CAPTAIN COOK CAME TO AUSTRALIA; WE KNOW THERE WAS
AN ITALIAN IN THE FIRST FLEET. DURING THE 19TH CENTURY MIGRANTS
ARRIVED IN AUSTPALIA IN SMALL BUT GROWING NUMBERS; PARTICULARLY
AFTER THE IMPETUS OF THE GOLD DISCOVERIES OF THE 1350' S.
RAFFAELLO CARBONI WAS ONE OF THE MINERS' LEADERS AT THE EUREKA
STOCKADE IN 1854. GiISEPPE GARIBALDI, THE GREAT FIGHTER FOR
ITALIAN UNIFICATION, ONE OF THE BUILDERS OF THE MODERN ITALIAN
DEMOCRACY WHOSE ANNIVERSARY WE OBSERVE TODAY, WEIGHED ANCHOR IN
THE BRIG CARMEN OFF TASMANIA IN 1352. SINCE THOSE EARLY BEGINNINGS
THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS GROWN TO BE THE BIGGEST, THE MOST VIGOROUS,
THE MOST VALUABLE OF ALL NON-BRITISH NATIONAL GROUPS IN THIS COUNTRY.
/ 3 
9-
f'bRE THAN 3WXW AUSTRALIAN RESIDENTS WERE BORN IN ITALY,
ACCORDING TO THE BEST ESTIMATES, THERE ARE VORE THAN A MILLION
AUSTRALIANS OF ITALIAN DESCENT. IT IS EASILY FORGOTTEN THAT
AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF THE WO) RLD S GREAT MULTI-NATIONAL COMM~ UNITIES,
' PE HAVE HAD ENORMOUS BENEFITS FROM THE INFLOW OF
EUROPEAN MIGRANTS. THE LEAST OF THOSE BENEFITS IS THE
REMINDER OF OUR LINKS WITH OTHER NATIONS AND THE INTERDEPENDENCE
. OF ALL NATIONS IN SOLVING OUR CO~ tAN PROBLEMS. AUSTRALIA'S
GEOGRAPHIC ISOLATION HAS PLACED US FAR FROM THE ANCIENT CENTRES
OF POWER AND IDEAS. IT WAS NEVER MORE ESSENTIAL THAN IT IS
TODAY FOR AUSTRALIANS TO STRENGTHEN THEIR CONTACTS WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES AND DEVELOP CLOSER RELATIONS WITH THE NATIONS OF THE
OLD WORLD THE NATIONS OF EUROPE. TH-AT WAS THE ESSENTIAL
PURPOSE OF MY VISIT To EUROPE LAST DECEMIBER AND JANUARY. YOU
WILL REMEMBER THERE WAS SOME MILD CRITICISM OF THAT MISSION IN
AUSTRALIA AT THE TIME. THIS IS NOT THE OCCASION FOR POLITICAL
SELF-JUSTIFICATION, BUT I AM CERTAIN THAT NO ONE IN THIS ROOM,
NO ONE WITH ANY AWARENESS OF AUSTRALIA'S PROPER ROLE IN TH-E WORLD,
NO ONE WITH ANY FEELING FOR THE DE. PTH AN4D RANGE OF OUR CONTACTS WITH
THE NATIONS OF PEOPLES OF EUROPE, COULD DOUBT THE IMPORTANCE OF THAT
MISSION, AND, IF I MAY SAY SO, THE IMPORTANCE OF WHAT IT ACHIEVED. 
I HAD THE VERY GREAT PLEASURE OF VISITING ITALY,
NOT FOR THE FIRST TIME AS PRIME MINISTER, BUT THE SECOND.
LIAM PROUD TO SAY THAT ROME IS THE ONLY CAPITAL ON THE EUROPEAN
CONTINENT WHICH I HAVE VISITED TWICE SINCE MY GOVERNMENT WAS
ELECTED. IN JANUARY I MET PRESIDENT LEONE AND HAD TALKS WITH
, SENIOR MINISTERS INCLUDING PRIME MINISTER i'bRO AND FOREIGN MINISTER
'* RUMOR. WE REVIEWED THE BUOYANT TRADE RELATIONS BETWEEN ITALY
SAND AUSTRALIA. ITALY IS ONE OF AUSTRALIA'S MAJOR TRADING PARTNERS
OUR TWELFTH MOST IMPORTANT EXPORT MARKET AND OUR EIGHTH MOST IMPORTANT
SOURCE OF IMPORTS. MY GOVERNMENT HAS MOVED TO ENSURE THAT THERE
IS A CONTINUING AND HEALTHY TRADE 3SETWEEN US. LAST YEAR THE
THEN MINISTER FOR OVERSEAS TRADE ANNOUNCED THE FORMATION OF THE
ITALO-AUSTRALIAN TRADE ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO PROMOTE DEVELOPMENT
OF COMtERCIAL RELATIONS BETWEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA, THE COMMITTEE
WAS FORMED BY A GROUP OF ITALIAN AND AUSTRALIAN BUSINESSMEN TO
PROMOTE COOPERATION AND STREAMLINE PROCESSES BETWEEN THE BUSINESS
COiMUNITIES OF BOTH COUNTRIES, J'
L
' U WLr&gt;*-7jj_ l
JL' tCj.' U,/ bC,&amp;/ C
-Z L y i L
f/ L C 
AGAIN, WHILE IN ROME, I SIGNED A CULTURAL AGREEMENT
BETWiEEN ITALY AND AUSTRALIA AS A TANGIBLE EXPRESSION OF THE
CULTURAL AND HUMAN CONTACTS BUILT UP OVER A GUARTER OF A CENTURY.
THE AGREEMENT SPECIFICALLY RECOGNISES THE CONTRIBUTION WHICH THE
ITALIAN COMMIUNITY HAS MADE TO THE QUALITY AND DIVERSITY OF LIFE IN
AUSTRALIA. AND SEEKS TO PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF-BILATERAL
RELATIONS IN THE SOCIAL, CULTUJRAL, ARTISTIC, SCIENTIFIC AND
SPORTING FIELDS. IGIVE ONE EXAMPLE OF THE SORT OF COOPERATI. ON
WE CAN EXPECT. THE AGREEMENT PROVIDES THAT AUSTRALIA AND ITALY
WILL EXCHANGE TEACHERS TO FACILITATE THE INTEGRATION OF ITALIAN
CHILDREN INTO THE AUSTRALIAN CO IMUNITY, WHILE MAINTAINING THEIR
CULTURAL TIES WITH THEIR BIRTHPLACE.
SIGNIFICANT AND SYMBOLIC AS THESE THINGS ARE,
THE REAL IMPORTANCE OF MY VISIT TO ITALY AND OTHER NATIONS OF
EUROPE WAS IN THE OPPORT-UNITY WE HAD TO EXCHANGE VIEWS ON
COMMON PROBLEMS, ON WORLD PROBLEMS. IN A SPEECH I GAVE IN
ROME ON 8 JANUARY .1975 1 SAID THIS: 
1~
j " I DOUBT IF THERE HAS EVER BEEN A TIME
WHEN CONSULTATION AID CO-OPERATION BETW! EEN
NATIONAL LEADERS WAS URGENT OR
IMPORTANT. AUSTRALIA AND ITALY HAVE GREAT
CULTURAL AND SOCIAL TRADITIONS IN COPON:
MORE SIGNIFICANTLY, WE SHARE WITH ALL
COUNTRIES OF THE WESTERN WORLD GREAT SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS. INFLATION AND
UNEMPLOYMENT POSE A GRAV/ E AND GROWING
THREAT TO DEMOCRATIC VALUES AND SOCIAL
ORDER AND COHESION. IF WESTERN NATIONS
ARE TO SOLVE THESE PROBLEMS WITHOUT A
RECOURSE TO AUTHORITARIANISM OR A
RELAPSE INTO ANARCHY, THEY WILL DO SO
ONLY BY RESTORING FAITH IN THE DEMOCRATIC
SYSTEM. IT IS TIME FOR GOVERNMENTS, FOR
POLITICIANS, FOR ALL FREE POLITICAL PARTIES
TO RENEW THEIR COMMITMENT TO THE FORMS AND
VALUES OF A DEMOCRATIC SOCIECTY. THERE IS NO
MORE URGENT TASK FOR MODERN STATESMEN THAN
TO LEAD, TO INSPIRE, TO NOURISH THIS COVMITNENT.
THE BREAKDOWN OF DEMOCRlACY IN ONE COUNTRY,
ATTACKS ON DEMOCRACY IN ONE COUNTRY, MUST BE
RECOGNISED AS AN ATTACH ON DEMCRACY EVERYWHERE.
I BELIEVE THE LEADERS AND PEOPLES
OF ITALY AND AUSTRALIA. ThID NATIONS WITH
DEMOCRATIC SYSTEMS, CAN PLAY A PART IN
REBUILDING THE WORLD'IS FAITH IN THE FLEXIBILITY
AND STRENGTH OF DEMO1CRACY." i as118~ 
7
/ 7-THAT IS OUR URGENT TASK, THAT WAS THE RELED/ ANCE
OF MY MISSION TO EUROPE. THAT IS THE LESSON TO B13KEE PT IN
MIND WHEN WE CELEBRATE THE ANNIVERSARY OF POST-WAR DEMOCRACY IN
ITALY. DEMOCRACY IS STRONGEST WHEN IT PROVIDES ITS
. CITIZENS WITH THE MEANS TO A FULL LIFE AND A MEASURE OF
MATERIAL SECURITY AND SPIRITUAL FULFILMENT. FOR TOO LONG
IN AUSTRALIA MIGRANTS LACKED THESE ESSENTIAL THINGS, THE
SLABOR PARTY WAS THE FIRST TO IDENTIFY MIGRANTS AS ONE OF THE
PRIME DISADVANTAGED GROUPS IN AUST. RALIAN SOCIETY, CUR
POLICY SINCE WE CAME TO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN TO RECTIFY A LONG
TRADITIONr OF INJUSTICE AND DEPRIVATION, TO GIVE MIGRANTS THE
SAME REWARDS AND OPPORTUNITIES AS OTHER AUSTRALIANS.
WE NO LONGER CONCENTRATE ON BRINGING VAST NUMIBERS
OF NEW SETTLERS TO AUSTRALIA. ARE NOT INTERESTED IN NUMBERS
FOR THEIR OWN SAKE. THE BEST INVESTMENT WE CAN MAKE IN OUR
FUTURE IS TO ENSURE THAT MIGRANTS ALREADY IN AUSTRALIA LEAD
SECURE AND HAPPY LIVES. AUSTRALIA'S MIGRANT INTAKE IS NOW LARGELY
DETERMINED BY MIGRANTS THEMSELVES, THIS IS BECAUSE WE HAVE
GIVEN PRIORITY IN THE SELECTION OF MIGRANTS TO THE REUNION OF
FAMILIES, NO TESTS OF ACCEPTABILITY BEYOND THOSE OF SOUND
HEALTH AND GOOD CHARACTER ARE APPLIED TO THOSE ,' vHO WISH TO
JOIN THEIR FAMILIES IN AUSTRALIA. 1,/ 8 
WE BELIEVE THE PEOPLE ' MOST LIKELY TO SETTLE HAPPILY IN
AUSTRALIA ARE THOSE WHO COME HERE TO JOIN MEMBERS OF
THEIR OWN FAMILY. CUR SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE
PROGRAMS HAVE VASTLY IMPROVED THE LIVING STANDARDS OF
MIGRANT PEOPLE, AND JUST AS IMPORTANT, HAVE HELPED TO
INVOLVE THEM MORE CLOSELY IN COMMUNITY DECISIONS AND
PLANNING, PROGRAMS SUCH AS THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
! PLAN, COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRES AND REDS IMPORTANT AS
i THEY ARE FOR ALL AUSTRALIANS ARE OF PARTICULAR BENEFIT TO
MIGRANTS BECAUSE OF THE ENCOURAGEMENT THEY GIVE FOR
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS AND GOVERNMENT
ACTION. IT IS TIME GOVERNMENTS GAVE MORE TANGIBLE
RECOGNITION TO THOSE WHO HAVE DONE MUCH TO BUILD) AUSTRALIAN
SOCIETY, THE ITALIANS WHO CAME TO AUSTRALIA CONTRIBUTED
GREATLY TO OUR WAY OF LIFE. AUSTRALIANS OWE A LASTING DEBT
TO THE ITALIAN CANEGROWERS IN [ ORTH QUEENSLAND, THE ITALIAN
GOLDMINERS IN W'ESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE ITALIAN TOBACCO GROWERS
IN VICTORIA AND W'ESTERN AUSTRALIA, THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE
GROWERS OF VICTORIA AND iEW SOUTH !" I'ALES, THE SNOWY ' MOUNTAINS
SCHEME WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE WITHOUT THE WORK OF ITALIAN
RIGGERS AND ENGINEERS, THE ITALIAN COMMUNITY HAS HAD A
REAL INFLUENCE IN THE SMALL BUSINESS FIELD AS WELL AS
IN LARGER ENTERPRISES SUCH AS THE TRANSFIELD CORPORATION.
[ RY GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT TO RECOGNISE THIS CONTRIBUTION
TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE AND PROSPERITY BY THE APPOINTMEiNT-OF / 9 
DR. EVASIO COSTANZO TO THE AUSTRALIA COUNCIL, CLAUDE PLCORSO
TO THE UNIVERSITIES COMMlISSION, AND NOT LEAST, YOUR CLUB PRESIDENTd
e fj 3BAYUTTI, TO THE BOARD OF QANTAS.
ONE OF THE GREAT REWARDS OF MY 23 YEARS IN PUBLIC
LIFE HAS BEEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO MEET AND MIX WITH MEMBERS OF THE
AusTRALIAN ITALIAN COMMUNITY. IHAVE MADE MANY DEEP AND LASTING
FRIENDSHIPS; I HAVE SPENT MANY HOURS IN HOSPITABLE SURROUNDINGS
AMONG ITALIAN PEOPLE. I HOPE THE TIME WILL COME WHEN OUR GREAT
MIGRANT COInlNITIES WILL NO LONGER SEEM SEPARATE OR DISTINCT GROUPS
BUT INTEGRAL PARTS OF SOCIETY; WHEN HAVING AN ITALIAN NAME WILL
SEEM NO MORE REMARKABLE THAN HAVING AN ENGLISH OR AN IRISH NAME. WE
HAVE OF COURSE MOVED A LONG WAY IN GENERAL SOCIAL ATTITUDES
IN THE SPIRIT OF TOLEANCE AND ACCEPTANCE SINCE THAT GREAT MASS
MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE BEGAN WITH THE PROCLN ATION OF AN ITALIAN
REPUBLIC 29 YEARS AGO. WE STILL HAVE FURTHER TO MOVE. FOR MY
PART I NEVER FORGET AND I SAID AS MUCH IN ROME THAT ALMOST
EVERYTHING THAT IS BASIC TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE THE ORIGINS OF OUR
CULTURE AND CIVILISATION, OUR ART, OUR SOCIAL AND SPIRITUAL VALUES,
MUCH OF OUR LANGUAGE CAME-TO US FROM ITALY. IT IS A LONG HISTORIC
PROCESS. IT IS STILL CONTINUING. IT IS NOURISHED BY ORGANISATIONS
SUCH AS APIA AND BY THE VIGOUR, THE CHARM, THE INDUSTRIOUS SPIRIT,
THE GREATNESS OF THE ITALIAN PEOPLE, 



SUPERI OR COURT OF AUSTRALIA BILL
ESPLU ILULPEMfrLEJUIlSER
JJUNE 1975
THIS BILL TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
AUSTRALIA AFFORDS AN OUTSTANDING EXAMPLE OF LIBERAL INEPTITUDE
IN GOVERNMENT AND OBSTRUCTION IN OPPOSITION.
A PAPER ENTITLED " THE NECESSITY FOR A NEW
FEDERAL COURT" WAS DELIVERED AT THE 13TH LEGAL CONVENTION
IN HOBART IN JANUARY 1963 BY MR MAURICE BYERS, Q. C. AND
MR PAUL TOOSE, Q. C, NOW^ THE SOLICITOR-GENERAL OF AUSTRALIA
AND A JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES. IN
THE DISCUSSIONS ON THE PAPER THE SOLICITOR-GENERAL, SIR
KENNETH BAILEY, ANNOUNCED ON BEHALF OF THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL
THAT THE CABINET HAD AUTHORISED HIM TO DESIGN A NEW FEDERAL
SUPERIOR COURT. SIR KENNETH WENT ON TO SAY THAT THE PAPER
WOULD BE OF MATERIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
SIR GARFIELD BARWICK, WHOSE CONGRATULATIONS HE GAVE TO THE
LEARNED AUTHORS. IN 1964, JUST BEFORE HE BECAME CHIEF JUSTICE,
SIR GARFIELD WROTE A 21-PAGE ARTICLE ON THE PROPOSED NEW
FEDERAL SUPERIOR COURT FOR THE INITIAL ISSUE OF THE
FEDERAL LAW REVIEW, THE JOURNAL OF THE LAW SCHOOL OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY. 
1)
ON 15 MARCH -167, IN ANSWER TO A QUESTION
' BY THE HIONOURHABLE MEMBER FOR MORETON, ATTORNEY GEN ERAL BOWEN,
NOW CH-IEF JUDGE IN EQUITY IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH
WALES, SAID AN ANORMOUS AMOUNT OF WORK HAD BEEN DONE ON
THE PROPOSAL FOR THE NEW COURT BY SIR GARFIELD BARWICK AND
BY HIS OWN IMMEDIATE PREDECESSOR, MR SNEDDEN. HE PROMISED'
A MINISTERIAL STATEMENT. HE MADE THE STATEMENT ON 18 MAY.
HE DELIVERED A PAPER ON THE PROPOSAL TO THE 15TH LEGAL
CONVENTION ON 17 JULY.
IN MARCH 1968, OPENING A NEW SESSION, THE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL STATED:
" INY GOVERNMENT WILL PREPARE LEGISLATION FOR
CREATION OF A COMMONWEALTH SUPERIOR COURT TO
RELIEVE PRESSURE ON4 THE HIGH COURT."
ON 29 OCTOBER 1968, ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN
ASKED A COMMITTEE UNDER MR JUSTICE KERR, LATER CHIEF JUSTICE
OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND NOW THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL, TO CONSIDER
THE JURISDICTION TO BE GIVEN TO THE PROPOSED COMMONWEALTH
SUPERIOR COURT TO REVIEW ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS. THE
OTHER MEMBERS WERE SOLICITOR-GENERAL MASON, LATER A JUDGE OF
APPEAL OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND NOW A
JUSTICE OF THE HIGH COURT, AND PROFESSOR WHITMORE AND
LATER SOLICITOR-GENERAL ELLICOTT, NOW THE IIONOURA13LE MEMBER
FOR WENTWORTHI. THE COMMITTEE'S REPORT WAS TABLED ON
_ ILI OCTOBELR 1971. 
-3-
I'EANTIME, /\ TTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN AND IN THE
1969 PARLIAMENT THE NEW ATTORNEY-GENERAL HUGHES, AND UNDER
THE MCI" HAHON GOVERNMENT THE RESTORED ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN,
WERE ENGAGED IN PREPARING SOME 66 COMPLEMENTARY BILLS WHICH
IT WAS DESIRED TO INTRODUCE BEFORE DEBATING THE COMMONWEALTH
SUPERIOR COURT BILL.
THUS WORK ON THIS BILL PROCEEDED THROUGH THE
PARLIAMENTS ELECTED IN 1961, 1963, 1966 AND 1969, UNDER
LIBERAL PRIME MINISTERS MENZIES, HOLT, GORTON AND MCMAHON,
LIBERAL ATTORNEYS-GENERAL BARWICK, SNEDDEN, BOWEN, HUGHES
AND BOWEN AGAIN AND, IN ONE CAPACITY OR ANOTHER, SOLICITORSGENERAL
BAILEY, MASON, ELLICOTT AND BYERS. AND AT LAST ON
27 OCTOBER 1972, THE DAY AFTER THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ROSE FOR THE ELECTIONS, THE LAST LIBERAL ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
SENATOR GREENWOOD, ANNOUNCED THAT THE MCMAHON GOVERNMENT
HAD REACHED THE CONCLUSION THAT THE PROPOSAL TO ESTABLISH A
COMMONWEALTH SUPERIOR COURT SHOULD NOT BE PROCEEDED WITH.
ON THE LABOR SIDE THE PROPOSAL HADBEEN SUPPORTED
AND PROMOTED CONSISTENTLY. I URGED IT AT THE ALEGAL CONVENTION
IN PERTH IN 1957 AND IN THE DEBATE ON THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S
ESTIMATES IN 1958 AND IN DOZENS OF SPEECHES AND QUESTIONS
IN THE HOUSE THROUGHOUT THE 1960' s. I INCLUDED THE PROPOSAL
IN THE POLICY SPEECHES I DELIVERED ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY AT THE ELECTIONS IN 1972 AND 1974. 
THERE CAN SCARCELY HAVE BEEN A PROPOSAL WHICH
BOTH SIDES OF POLITICS HAVE WORKED ON SO LONG, BUT WHAT
HIAS BEEN THE HISTORY OF THE BILL UNDER MY GOVERNMENT?
A BILL TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
AUSTRALIA WAS INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE IN DECEMBER 1973 B~ Y
ATTORNEY-GENERAL MURPHY. THAT BILL LAPSED WHEN PARLIAMENT
WAS PROROGUED TO ENABLE THE QUEEN TO OPEN THE PARLIAMENT* ON
THE OCCASION OF HER VISIT To AUSTRALIA IN FEBRUARY 1974.
THE BILL WAS AGAIN INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE ON 14 MARCH
LAST YEAR, BUT THE MOTION FOR THE SECOND READING OF THE
BILL WAS DEFEATED IN THE SENATE ON 2 APRIL 1974.
THE BILL WAS REINTRODUCED INTO THIS HOUSE AFTER
THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION OF MAY LAST YEAR AND WAS PASSED ON
24 JULY. THiE OPPOSITION AGAIN OPPOSED THE BILL IN THE
SENATE AND THE MOTION FOR THE SECOND READING OF THE BILL
RESULTED IN A TIED VOTE ON 26 FEBRUARY THIS YEAR. SO NOW
THE BILL HAS BEEN INTRODUCED FOR A SECOND TIME IN THIS HOUSE.
THE PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE.
SUPERIOR COURT WERE WELCOMED FROM THE OUTSET BY LEADERS OF
THE LEGAL PROFESSION IN AUSTRALIA. A COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY
THE LAW COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA REPORTED IN FAVOUR IN AUGUST 1963.
SO DID THE NEW SOUTH WALES BAR ASSOCIATION. ATTORNEY-GENERAL
BOWEN TOLD THE LEGAL CONVENTION IN JULY 11967 THAT THERE WAS A
BROAD CONSENSUS THAT SUCH A COURT SHOULD BE ESTABLISHED. HE
STATED CATEGORICALLY THAT " fA DECISION HAS BEEN TAi( EN TO
ESTABLISH THE COURT" 1 AND THAT ARGUMENTS ADVANCED AGAINST THE
' itI
IDEA ARE NOW ACADEMIC", BUT A MORE CONSERVATIVE VIEW WAS / q
11 
TAKEN IN THE TWILIGHT YEARS OF THE LIBERAL GOVERNMENT AND
THE CONCEPT CAME TO BE OPPOSED WHEN IT WAS APPRECIATED THAT
THE BILL DESCRIBED BY ATTORNEY-GENERAL BOWEN 8 YEARS AGO
WOULD ENABLE THE SUPERIOR COURT TO ENTER UPON JURISDICTION
NOW EXERCISED BY THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE STATES,
SUCH ARGUMENTS, HOWEVER, LOSE SIGHT OF THE FACT
THAT THERE IS ALREADY A LARGE BODY OF FEDERAL LEGISLATION
WHICH WOULD FALL TO BE INTERPRETED AND ADMINISTERED BY A
FEDERAL SUPERIOR COURT IN WHICH THE LEGAL PROBLEMS OF A
JURISDICTIONAL NATURE THAT HAVE BEEN URGED AS OBJECTIONS
AGAINST THE SUPERIOR COURT WOULD HAVE NO PLACE. FOR MORE
THAN SEVENTY YEARS, INDUSTRIAL. MATTERS ARISING UNDER THE
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT HAVE BEEN DEALT WITH BY
A FEDERAL COURT WITHOUT GIVING RISE TO SUBSTANTIAL
JURISDICTIONAL PROBLEMS. 
FOR ALMOST FIFTY YEARS, THERE HAS BEEN A
FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY, WHICH HAS SAT IN SYDNEY AND
MAELBOURNE. THESE ARE TWO EXAMPLES OF LONG-STANDING
JURISDICTIONSEXERCISED BY FEDERAL COURTS,
TO THESE HAVE BEEN ADDED IN RECENT YEARSP
SUBSTANTIAL ADDITIONAL AREAS OF FEDERAL LAW, FROM THE
VERY FIRST TRADE PRACTICES ACT IN 1965 EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION
IN FEDERAL TRADE PRACTICES LAW HAS BEEN VESTED IN
THE INDUSTRIAL COURT, THAT WAS A MATTER INITIATED BY OUR
PREDECESSORS. THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT 1974, ADOPTED BY
THIS PARLIAMENT, CONTINUES TO RECOGNISE THE PRINCIPLE THAT
THE PROPER COURT TO iNTERPRET AND APPLY THE FEDERAL LAW ON
TRADE PRACTICES IS A FEDERAL COURT. THE TRADE PRACTICES ACT
1974 VESTS JURISDICTION IN THE SUPERIOR COURT AND, UNTIL
THAT COURT IS ESTABLISHED, IN THE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL COURT.
THERE IS BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT A NATIONAL COMPENSATION
BILL AND THE CORPORATIONS AND SECURITIES INDUSTRY
BILL. THE DRAFTING OF-A NATIONAL COMPANIES BILL IS WELL
ADVANCED. THIS HIOUSE HAS PASSED THE ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL BILL, THE FIRST OF A SERIES OF MEASURES INTENDED TO
BRING ABOUT A SUBSTANTIAL REFORM OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AT
THE FEDERAL LEVEL. 1 
THiis GOVERNMENT HAS ESTABLISHED THE LAW REFORM
COMMISSION TO APPROACH THE TASK OF REFORMING THE LAW IN
AUSTRALIA ON A NATIONAL SCALE, THE LAW REFORM
COMMISSION IS CHARGED WITH THE DUTY OF CONSIDERING NOT
ONLY MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT
BUT ALSO PROPOSALS FOR UNIFORMITY BETWEEN THE LAWS OF
THE STATES AND OF THE TERRITORIES, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
THE LAW REFORM COMMISSION IS A RECOGNITION OF THE ABSURDITY
OF HAVING SO MANY DIFFERENCES IN LAW ACROSS STATE AND
TERRITORY BOUNDARIES, IT HIGHLIGHTS. THE NEED TO HAVE A
COURT THAT HAS JURISDICTION T-HROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA AND
THAT CAN INTERPRET AND APPLY THE LAWS ENACTED BY THIS
PARLIAMENT ON A UNIFORM BASIS THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE OF
AUSTRALIA. THE GREAT DEVELOPMENT IN FEDERAL LAW TO WHICH
HAVE REFERRED MAKES THE NEED TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT
MUCH MORE PRESSING, WHILE THE INTERPRETATION OF THE LAW
REMAINS WITH THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE STATES NO MATTER CAN
BE REGARDED AS BEING SETTLED THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA UNTIL
A DECISION HAS BEEN GIVEN ON IT BY THE HIGH COURT. IT
IS TRUE THAT A DECISION OF, SAY, THE FULL COURT OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF VICTORIA IS TREATED WITH THE GREATEST
RESPECT BY THE COURT OF ) PEAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 11 
BUT THE VICTORIAN DIECISION HAS NO BINDING FORCE ON
THE NEW SOUTH WALES COURT, EVEN THOUGH THE TWO COURTS
MAY B3E DEALING WITH , SAME SECTION OF AN ACT OF THIS
PARLIAMENT, A DECISION OF THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPERIOR
COURT WOULD BE BINDING ON THE JUDGES OF THAT COURT THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA, SO THAT IN THOSE IMPORTANT AREAS OF FEDERAL
LAW IN WHICH THE SUPERIOR COURT WOULD BE EXERCISING
EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COURT
WOULD SUBSTANTIALLY CONTRIBUTE TOWARDS CERTAINTY IN THE
LAW, THE* CASE FOR THE SUPERIOR COURT IS NOW EVEN FURTHER
STRENGTHENED BY THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA UNDER THE FAMILY LAW BILL$ THIS DECISION BY
THE PARLIAMENT IS CLEAR RECOGNITION THAT IN THIS MOST
IMPORTANT AREA OF LAW, WITH ITS OWN SPECIAL PROBLEMS AND
A NEED FOR SPECIAL PROCEDURES, THERE IS GREAT MERIT IN
HAVING A COURT THAT HAS JURISDICTION THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA,
AND THAT CAN INTERPRET AND APPLY THAT LAW ON A UNIFORM BASIS.
THE SUPERIOR COURT WILL ENABLE A CONSOLIDATION OF
JURISDICTION THAT IS NOW EXERCISED BY FEDERAL AND TERRITORY
COURTS. IT WILL BRING TOGETHER IN THE ONE COURT THE
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL COUR-r, THE FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY
AND THE SUPREME COURTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPTIAL TERRITORY
AND THU NORTHERN TERRITORY, IT WILL ENABLE THE JURISDICTION
OF THESE COURTS TO BE EXERCISED ON A MORE RATIONAL AND
COMPREHENSIVE BASIS, I I ! e 
IT IS ALMOST SEVEN YEARS SINCE THE FIRST BILL
TO ESTABLISH THE SUPERIOR COURT WAS INTRODUCED INTO THIS
HOUSE, CAN ANYONE DOUBT THAT IT IS TIME THAT WE MOVED
ON THIS MATTER? IS IT NOT TIME THE OPPOSITION STOPPED
PREVARICATING? SHOULD WE NOT NOW PUT THE INTERESTS OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS AHEAD OF STATE RIGHTS AND PARTY CONSIDERATIONS?
-0-0-0-0-0-0-



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT OPENING OF
OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL, LISMORE
8 JUNE, 1975 ^ I.
YOUR LORDSHIP, ON, DOUG ANTHONY, MR. MAYOR,
REVEREND CLERGY AND SISTERS, MEMBERS AND FRIENDS OF THE
SOCIETY OF ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO BE BACK IN
LISMORE AGAIN AND TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH ANOTHER
ST. VINCENT DE PAUL INITIATIVE. IN FEBRUARY LAST YEAR
I WAS ASKED TO OPEN THE OZAmAM HOME IN CANBERRA AND
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO, MY WIFE AND I ATTENDED THE OPENING
OF ST. BEDE'S IN HURSTVILLE,
IN CANBERRA, THE BLESSING WAS GIVEN BY
BISHOP CAHILL AN EASY NAME TO REMEMBER IN NEW SOUTH ' ALES.
AT ST. BEDE'S THE BLESSING CAME FROM BISHOP CREMIN
ANOTHER GOOD, EASY IRISH NAME. AND BEING A CHARITABLE
MAN, BISHOP CREMIN FELT HE SHOULD WARN ME ABOUT LISMORE.
HE TOLD ME THAT BISHOP FARRELLY HAD BEEN SUCCEEDED BY
HIS LORDSHIP BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE, WHO MUST HAVE ONE OF
THE MOST DIFFICULT ECCLESIASTICAL NAMES IN THE COUNTRY
IF NOT THE WORLD. ,/ 2 
2.
I MUST SAY I WAS SO INTRIGUED ' Y THE NAME
THAT I LOOKED IT UP INi A BOOK CALLED SI, R NAt OFl UT i E
UNITED KIGDDOM., THAT WAS AFTER I COULDN'T FIND IT IN
THE BOOK OF SAINS., ANYWAY, I LEARNED THAT IT'S OF
SCANDINAVIAN ORIGIN AND MEANS " THE HILL PASTURE CLEARING".
WHICH IS A QUITE PROPER NAME FOR SOMEONE WITH A FLOCK
TO TEND, -BISHOP CREMIN WAS SAYING TO ME THAT WHEN
HE WAS DOING POSTGRADUATE STUDIES IN ROME,
BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE LED A CHARMED LIFE, HE WAS
NEVER CALLED ON TO SAY ANYTHING BECAUSE NOBODY COULD
PRONOUNCE HIS NAME. I DON'T KNOW WHETHER HE MIGHT
LIKE TO CHANGE PLACES WITH ME.
TWO WEEKS AGO AT ST. BEDE'S IN HURSTVILLE
I WAS STRUCK BY THE GENEROSITY OF THE STATE PRESIDENT
OF THE ST. VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY, BILL FITZGERALD.
NOT ONLY DID HE PRESENT ME WITH A BOOK ILLUSTRATING
THE PROJECTS UNDERTAKEN BY CATHOLIC CARE FOR THE AGED,
BUT HE REMARKED ON THE SENSE OF PARTNERSHIP WHICH HAS
GROWN UP BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND CHARITABLE
ORGANISATIONS IN TOGETHER IDENTIFYING AND SERVING THOSE
IN THE COMMUNITY WHO NEED OUR ATTENTION AND OUR CARE,
1 / 3 
3.
IT IS A VITAL PARTNERSHIP AND) I APPRECIATE THAT
COOPERATION, 11TS TANGIBLE RESUJLTS, SUCH AS HOMES
LIKE THIS ONE, W/ ILL STAND AND SERVE THE NEEDS OF
GENERATIONS OF AUSTRALIANS WHO DESERVE TO DE LOOKED AFTER.
PEOPLE ARE ALW'AYS ASKING WHEIRE THEIR TAXES
GO, WHERE ALL THE MONEY IS BEING SPENT. IT IS EASY
TO JUSTIFY EXPENDITURE ON OBVIOUS THINGS LIK( E EDUCATION
AND HEALTH FACILITIES. ON PURELY ECONOMIC GROUNDS THE
INVESTMENT BRINGS EXCELLENT DIVIDENDS FOR OUR SOCIETY
AS A WHOLE. BUT THE REAL HUMANITY OF ANY SOCIETY [ S SEEN
TrHROUGH THE WAY IT BOTHERS TO TREAT ITS OL-DER PEOPLE,
PEOPLE W. 1HO HAVE RETIRED, HAVING( 5 GIVEN THEIR WORKING
LIVES AND QUITE FREQUENTLY THEIR HEALTH, NOT TO0 MENTION
THEIR SONS AND DAUGHTERS,, TO THE SERVICE OF THEIR
COMMUNITY AND THEIR COUNTRY, EXPENDITURE ON THE NEEDS
OF THESE PEOPLE CAN NEVER BE EXPECTED TO SHOW RETURNS
IN MATERIAL TERMS. i v A 
IT'S PRECISELY THAT SORT OF EXPENDITURE
WHERE THE COMMUNITY SHOWS HOW I-HUMANE IT REALLY IS.
WHERE GOVERNMENTS SHOW HOW MUCH THEY CARE. THESE
ARE THE AREAS WHERE TIME AND AGAIN THE ST, VINCENT
DE PAUL SOCIETY HELPS BRIDGE THE VERY REAL GAP
BETWEEN THE HAVES AND THE HAVE-NOTS IN OUR SOCIETY,
THESE ARE THE AREAS THAT CONCERN MY GOVERNMENT,
THESE ARE THE VERY AREAS AT PRESENT UNDER CHALLENGE
IN OUR COURTS, SOME TWENTY YEARS AGO, SIR ROBERT MENZIES
INTRODUCED DIRECT FEDERAL SUBSIDIES FOR AGED PERSONS
HOMES, IT BEGAN AS A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR SUBSIDY.
WHEN A LABOR GOVERNMENT WAS ELECTED IN DECEMBER 1972
THE LEVEL OF SUBSIDY WAS 1'! E HAVE
INCREASED IT SUBSTANTIALLY SINCE THEN, MOST RECENTLY
LATE LAST YEAR, WHEN WE RAISED IT TO A $ 4 DIRECT
FEDERAL SUBSIDY FOR EVERY ONE DOLLAR SPENT. THIS
OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL, AMONG MANY OTHERS, BENEFITED
FROM THAT DECISION, IT HAS BEEN ABLE TO ATTRACT A
MAXIMUM SUBSIDY OF $ 470,538 FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
IN ALL, THIS LISMORE HOME HAS HAD $ 601,267 IN FEDERAL
GRANTS, DIRECT GRANTS. IT IS ONE OF 16 ST. VINCENT
DE PAUL HOMES IN NEW SOUTH WALES ACCOMMODATING 565 PEOPLE
AND ATTRACTING DIRECT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT GRANTS OF
$ 2,998,142, 
BUT WE'-C AINNOT AFFORD TO TAKE-SUCHI THINGS
FOR GRANTED, BECAUSE RIGHT NOW THERE ARE HIGH COURT
CHALLENGES WHICH CAST DOUBT ON THE RIGHT OF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO PAY MONEY DIRECTLY TO CHARITABLE
ORGANISATIONS FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES AND HOSTELS,
IT ALSO AFFECTS OTHER VITAL COMMUNITY-ORIENTED SERVICES
WHICH ARE SUBSIDISED, RANGING FROM MEALS ON WHEELS TO
THE BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE, SO MANY THINGS WE TAKE
FOR GRANT. ED AND WHICH SUCCESSIVE FEDERAL GOVERNMENTS
HAVE EITHER INITIATED OR HELPED SUSTAIN,
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT SCHEMES INVOLVING
QUITE COLOSSAL AMOUNTS OF MONEY, SCHEMES DESIGNED
TO STREAMLINE THE PROVISION OF VITAL COMMUNITY SERVICES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, SCHEMES IN WHICH ALL THE CHURCHES
HAVE A REAL INVOLVEMENT, THE ST, VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY
IN PARTICULAR IS CONCERNED WITH THE PROVISION OF SERVICES
RANGING FROM CARE OF THE HANDICAPPED TO SHELTER FOR
THE HOMELESS, ALL OF WHICH DESERVE AND GET DIRECT
FEDERAL SUBSIDIES. 1 6/ 6 
THE CONTENTrI ON ADVANC: ED BY TH OSE CHALLENGINC;
US IN THE COURTS IS THAT THIS MONEY OUGHT TO D; E DOLED
OUT TO THE INDIVIDUAL STATES WHICH CAN IN TURN DOLE
IT OUT TO RECIPIENT COMMUJNITY ORGANISATIONS, AND PROJECTS,
WE ARE TALIKING ABOUT $ 31 MILLION UNDER THE ACED PERSONS
HOMES ACT, $ 19 MILLION UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOSTELS ACT,
ALL. THAT COULD BE ACHIEVED BY CHANNELLING SUCH
MONEY THROUGH STATE BUREAUCRACIES WOULD-BE THE HOPELESS
SLOWING UP OF FUNDING FOR AREAS OF CARE WHICH SHOULD NOT
HAVE TO WAIT UPON THE RESOLUTION OF PETTY MANUJFACTURED
RIVALRIES. PEOPLE NEEDING CAP~ E INVARIABLY NEED IT
SOONER RATHER THAN LATER,-1 DON ' T NEED TO TE'LL THAT
TO THIS AUDIENCE WdHICH HAS ALREADY DEMONSTRATED HOW
MUCH IT CARES. THEL HOLY SPIRIT CONFERENCE OF THE ST. VINCENT
DE PAUL SOCIETY HERE IN LISMORE REALISED THE PRESSING
NEED FOR ADDITIONAL ACCOMMODATION FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE
IN THIS AREA, AND IN BUILDING THIS NEW HOSTEL, THEY
CARRIED ON THE WORK BEGUN sY FATHER JOHN ROGER ArD
MiR. ARTHUR MONAGHAN IN 19691 THIS NEW HOSTEL IS A
CAREFULLY PLANNED AND EXECUTED PROJECT, INCORPORATING
THE LATEST DESIGN IDEAS AND CATERING FOR 149 ELDERLY
RESIDENTS AND 2 LIVE-IN STAFF, 1 ,17 
7,
THE SOLE CRITERION FOR ADMISSION AS ALWAYS WITH
1HOMIES RUN BY THE ST, VINCENT IDE PAUL SOCIETY IS NEED,
I UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS ALREADY A WAITING LIST FOR
ADMISSION TO THIS NEW HOSTEL AND THAT THERE ARE 50 PEOPLE
WAITING FOR ADMISSION TO THE ORIGINAL WING,
I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT THE TIME WILL COME
WHEN THE MEMBERS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT CONFERENCE WILL
SIT DOWN AND CONSIDER THE WAITING LISTS AND WONDER
WHETHER THEY SHOULDN'T ADD TO THIS OZANAM VILLA COMPLEX
TO MEET THE CONTINUING COMMUNITY NEED FOR THIS KIND OF
ACCOMMODATION AND THE CARE THAT GOES WITH IT,
WHEN THAT HAPPENS, MY GOVERNMENT WILL BE
HAPPY TO COOPERATE WITH THEM IN THE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS
AND ADVICE ON THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS KIND OF
BUILDING, AND PROVIDING THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE TO
OUR FUNDING OF SUCH COMMUNITY PROJECTS DOES NOT SUCCEED,
MY GOVERNMENT WILL BE DELIGHTED TO ASSIST ONCE MORE
WITH THE PROVISION OF THE MAXIMUM POSSIBLE SUBSIDY,
THERE IS A VERY PEAL SENSE IN WHICH WE'RE ALL IN THIS
TOGETHER, I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASURE INDEED IN DECLARING
OPEN THIS LATEST ST, VINCENT DE PAUL PROJECT, THE OZANAM
VILLA HOSTEL, A FITTING REMINDER OF THE VISION OF YOUR
FOUNDER, FREDERIC OZANAM, 



I?
NOTES ORY
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY NEW SOUTH 14ALES BRANCH
* STATE CONFERECE
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
flR E, G. W! IHITLAM, C PA.. 1 41-4, JUP1 E 1975 SYD[ IEY-N; S'; 1J',
i r . II'
r r i 
I THE HISTORY OF THIS PARTY IS THE RECORD OF THE EFFORTS
OF OUR OPPONENTS TO DIVIDE US, OUR SUCCESSES ARE
MEASURED BY OUR SUCCESS IN RESISTING THOSE EFFORTS,
OUR FAILURES AND DISASTERS ARE THE STORY OF HOW
WE HAVE SUCCUMBED TO THOSE ATTEMPTS. THOSE EFFORTS
TO DIVIDE . THIS PARTY HAVE ONLY SUCCEEDED WHEN
THE PARTY ITSELF CHOSE TO DIVIDE WHEN ONE GROUP OR
SECTION OR FACTION WITHIN THE PARTY BELIEVED THAT
IT COULD PROMOTE ITS IMMEDIATE, ITS SHORT TERM INTEREST,
THROUGH A DIVIDED, A. WEAKENED PARTY.
SINCE WE WERE ELECTED TO OFFICE TWO AND A HALF YEARS AGO,
SSINCE WE WERE RE-ELECTED TO OFFICE JUST OVER ONE
YEAR AGO,. THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS HELD
STEADFASTLY TO ONE OBJECTIVE,
WHAT IS THAT OBJECTIVE? THE OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO
FULFIL THE POLICY OF THIS PARTY, THE POLICY GIVEN
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AND ACCEPTED BY THEM IN 1972,
THE POLICY GIVEN TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE AND
REAFFIRMED BY THEM IN 1974,
-I r-I I I T l-lj C
I 
-2-
WHEN THE PEOPLE ELECTED US IN 1972, WHEN THE
PEOPLE REAFFIRMED US IN OFFICE IN 1974, THEY VOTED
FOR OUR PROGRAM, THE PROGRAM AS THEY KNEW IT TO BE,
AS IT WAS PRESENTEDIN 1972 AND AGAIN IN 1974.
THERE ARE MANY COMPLAINTS ABOUT THE PROGRAM.
. MOUNTED AGAINST THIS PROGRAM IS A CAMPAIGN OF HOSTILITY
UNPARALLELED IN AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. THE HOSTILITY
SIS UNPARALLELED BECAUSE NEVER BEFORE IN AUSTRALIAN
HISTORY HAVE SO MANY VESTED INTERESTS BEEN TAKEN ON
AT ONE TIME, FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE ENTRENCHED,
. THE POWERFUL, THE HIGHLY PRIVILEGED HAVE FOUND THAT
THEIR DEMANDS ARE NOT ACCORDED THE NUMBER ONE
PRIORITY WHICH THEY BELIEVE IS THEIR INHERENT RIGHT.
.4. f
L.
' 77-
I CAN ACCEPT ALL THE GROUCHES AND THE GRIPES
AND'THE COMPLAINTS'OF ALL THOSE OLD ESTABLISHED
INTERESTS WHO BELIEVE THEY ARE NOT DOING
PARTICULARLY WELL OUT OF A LABOR GOVERNMENT. IN
CANBERRAI* IIT ' S ADIFFERENT MATTER WIHEN IT COMES TO
RESISTANCE TO THE PROGRAM WITHIN THE LABOR
4 MOVEMENT, -THIS IS A TIME WHEN THE LABOR
MOVEMENT HAS TO THINK VERY CLEARLY ABOUT
THE DIRECTION IT IS GOING TO TAKE,
IT IS A MISTAKE FOR ANY UNION TO BELIEVE THAT
-ITS OWN MUSCLE POWER IS AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE .4
FOR CONCERTED GOVERNMENT ACTION TO PROMOTE
REAL EQUALITY AND RAISE REAL STANDARDS&amp;
; IT IS A MISTAKE'FOR ANY'STATE MEMBER TO BELIEVE
THAT THE WAY . TO POPULARITY OR POWER IS TO
JOIN IN THE CHORUS AGAINST THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
IN CABERR S. .4
IT IS OUR BOAST THAT WE ARE THE ONLY TRUE
NATIONAL PARTY IN AUSTRALIA. -WE CANNOT BLAME THE
PEOPLE IF THEY TAKE US AT OUR WORD AND AT OUR OWN
VALUATION. .4 .4%
4.4 .4 .4.4 4 4.4. .4~ rl-.4.4 4 
-THE STRENGTH OF THE NATIONAL PARTY IS THE
. STRENGTH OF EACH SECTION OF THE ENTIRE PARTY.
THERE IS A MYTH THAT STATE PARTIES COULD PROSPER
IF THENATIONAL GOVERNMENT WERE DEFEATED,
THERE IS-A MYTH THAT IF YOU KNOCK THE LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA YOU WILL GET KUDOS
SFOR LABOR IN BRISBANE, OR SYDNEY OR MELBOURNE.
YOU WILL NOT,
. OUR OPPONENTS WILL ALWAYS DO THAT SORT OF THING
-SO MUCH BETTER. IT IS ONE OF THE GREAT MYTHS
THAT A STATE LABOR POLITICIAN, WHOEVER HE BE,
WILL GET GOOD MARKS BY KNOCKING A FEDERAL LABOR
GOVERNMENT, IF LABOR IS NOT NATIONALLY CREDIBLE, IS IT
TO BE THOUGHT FOR A MOMENT THAT IT CAN BE.
S CREDIBLE ON A STATE BASIS?
THERE IS NO POINT,
LIBERAL GAME THE NO DIVIDEND, IN PLAYING THE
OLD GAME OF DIVIDE AND RULE... r 
S*
i -4-
LET ME SAY VERY CLEARLY WHAT THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
GOVERNMENT IS ABOUT, IT IS ABOUT THE FULFILLMENT
OF THE POLICY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY
. AS PROMISED TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA,
i WE HEAR A GREAT DEAL ABOUT THE UNPREDICTABILITY
OF THE GOVERNMENT IN CANBERRA. THE REAL OBJECTION
IS THAT THIS GOVERNMENT IS ALL TOO PREDICTABLE,
-EVERYTHING. THAT WE HAVE TRIED TO DO, OR ARE DOING,
WAS IN THOSE POLICY SPEECHES.
IT MAY BE TRUE THAT IN 1972 SOME SUPPORTED US
ON THE GROUNDS THAT WE WERE NOT SERIOUS OR SINCERE
SOR INTENT UPON APPLYING OUR POLICIES, IT MAY BE
THAT SOME MISTOOK THE PROGRAM FOR MERE WINDOW-DRESSING,
IT MAY BE THAT SOME THOUGHT THAT ONCE WE GOT INTO
GOVERNMENT WE WOULD TAKE UP THE NORMAL POSITION
OF PEOPLE IN GOVERNMENT OF CYNICISM, OF BETRAYAL.
WHAT HAS HORRIFIED SO MANY OF THE WELL-ESTABLISHED,
SO MANY OF THE POWERFUL, SO MANY OF THE PRIVILEGED
IN AUSTRALIA IS THAT WE HAVE ACTUALLY SET ABOUT DOING
THOSE THINGS WHICH WE SAID WE WOULD DO AND WHICH
WE PROMISED TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA THAT WE
WOULD DO, 
* L ^ l
I) n
I
I r r
ADHER IUTOT HSE PLEDGES, AGAIN I KEPEA
IT IS NOT THE UNPREDICTABILITY OF THIS GOVERNMENT
AND OF THIS PARTY-TO WHICH OUR OPPONENTS OBJECT,
BUT OUR PREDICTABILITY THE FACT THAT WE HAVE TRIED
TO ABIDE BY OUR UNDERTAKINGS. IT IS OUR
SERIOUSNESS, OUR SINCERITY TO WHICH THEY OBJECT. TA.
WE INHERITEi-A GOVERNMENT WHICH WAS A JOKE;
TESE GREAT AND POWERFUL PEOPLE THOUGHT THAT ALL
GOVERNMENT WAS A JOKE; SO THEY TOOK OUR POLICY
FCR JUST ANOTHER SORT OF JOKE.
THEY FORGOT THAT THERE WERE MEN AND WOMEN IN:
' AUSTRALIA, THE MEN AND WOMEN OF THE AUSTRALIAN
LABOR PARTY) WHO MIGHT BE SERIOUS SERIOUS
Ifl THEIR TASK, SER-IOUS IN THEIR PROMISES AND
PLEDGES TO THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA AT AN ELECTION.
So WHAT WE HAVE DONE-FROM DECEMBER 1972
UNTIL THIS DAY IS TO TRY TO KEEP THOSE PROMISES, 
-6-
AND LET IT BE VERY CLEAR THAT THE PRINCIPLE
SOBJECTIVE REMAINS AS I STATED IT IN NOVEMBER 1972
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY. IF YOU LOOK AT EVERYTHING
I
t' DEMOCRATIC WORLD, SOUGHT TO PROMOTE EQUALITY, t..
t:
THIS GOVERNMENT HAS DONE, YOU WILL SEE THAT THAT
HAS BEEN ITS ABIDING AIM TO PROMOTE EQUALITY,
I EMPHASISE " TO PROMOTE EQUALITY" NOT TO
IMPOSE EQUALITY,:' WE HAVE IN A QUITE UNIQUE WAY'
IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA AND PERHAPS IN THE
ii \ r : e
1~. r
i 1~
i
i
c r 
-7-A
IN A SOCIETY SUCH AS OURS, EQUALITY, BOTH EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITY AND EQUALITY-OF RESULTS IS NOT GOING TO
BE DETERMINED SOLELY OR EVEN MAINLY BY EQUALITY OF
INCOME. THE FIRST AIM MUST BE GREATER EQUALITY OF
BASIC SERVICES,. THE SERVICES WHICH THE COMMUNITY ALONE
CAN PROVIDE IN A MODERN SOCIETY AND THROUGH GREATER
EQUALITY BETWEEN REGIONS. THE GREAT INEQUALITIES
IN AUSTRALIA ARE NOW NOT AS BETWEEN STATES, BUT AS
BETWEEN REGIONS WITHIN STATES. INCREASINGLY, A
FAMILY'S STANDARD OF LIVING, THEIR OPPORTUNITIES FOR
DECENT HEALTH, DECENT SCHOOLS, DECENT TRANSPORT,
DECENT ENVIRONMENT, ARE DETERMINED NOT SO MUCH BY THEIR
INCOME, BUT BY WHERE THEY LIVE,
EXT WEEK, AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE, WE WILL HEAR
A GREAT DEAL ABOUT A BETTER DEAL FOR THE STATES,
WE ARE PERFECTLY PREPARED TO PROVIDE A FAIR DEAL
NOT ON THE BASIS OF DIVIDING AUSTRALIA INTO SIX
COMPETING, CONFLICTING COMPARTMENTS OR SEVEN COMPETING
CONFLICTING GOVERNMENTS, BUT ON THE BASIS THAT ALL
THE GOVERNMENTS SHARE THE SAME PROBLEMS AND SHARE THE
SAME RESPONSIBILITY. 1
i 
* 1
11 -8-
1/
r
j
1
Trs 2
THOSE PROBLEMS CANNOT BE SOLVED JUST BY HANDING OUT
A FEW MORE MILLIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN TAXPAYERS'
MONEY, WE HAVE TO FIND PERMANENT SOLUTIONS WHICH
MAKE FOR BETTER SERVICES AND A MORE EFFICIENT ALLOCATION
OF THE NATION'S RESOURCES, THE APPROACH IE HAVE
ADOPTED EVER SINCE WE CAME INTO GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
TO TRY TO RELIEVE THE STATES OF SOME OF THE CHRONIC
BURDENS ON THEIR BUDGETS AND FREE THEM TO USE
THEIR RESOURCES MORE CONSTRUCTIVELY AND EFFECTIVELY.
IN THOSE AREAS WHERE STATE GOVERNMENTS ARE PROPERLY
PARAMOUNT,
THE LIBERAL APPROACH OFFERS NO LASTING SOLUTION,
THAT APPROACH IS TO LEAVE THE BASIC STRUCTURES
UNCHANGED,/ TO KEEP THE ARRANGEMENTS ABOUT FUNCTIONS
AS THEY ARE AND TO HOPE THAT THE EXISTING SYSTEM
CAN CONTINUE TO CREAK ALONG BY THE APPLICATION OF
A BIT MORE OF THE TAXPAYERS' MONEY, IN EFFECT
* THE LIBERALS ASK THE TAXPAYERS TO SUBSIDISE THE
INEFFICIENCIES AND INEQUALITIES OF EXISTING ARRANGEMENTS
AND TO MAKE GOOD THE LOSSES WHICH THOSE ARRANGEMENTS
MAKE INEVITABLE, THAT IS THE APPROACH OF THE LIBERAL
PREMIERS. IT ISN'T OUR APPROACH AND IT SHOULD NOT
BE THE APPROACH OF ANY SECTION OF THE PARTY. ii I
I I
. e 
8
-8ATHE
TWO GREAT DRAINS ON THE STATE BUDGETS ARE RAILWAYS
SAND HOSPITALS.,
IN NEW SOUTH WALES WE HAVE THE SITUATION IN BOTH
THOSE AREAS OF MOUNTING LOSSES AND DECLINING SERVICES.
' YET OUR EFFORTS TO HELP THE STATE GOVERNMENT
AND MORE IMPORTANTLY, TO HELP THE AUSTRALIANS
WHO LIVE IN NEW SOUTH WALES GET BETTER SERVICES,
:' MORE FAIRLY FINANCED, HAVE BEEN REJECTED OR
. OBSTRUCTED.
TOMORROW I SHALL BE ADDRESSSING THE SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN CONVENTION OF THE PARTY.
I SHALL BE ABLE TO DRAW A GREAT CONTRAST BETWEEN
"-' THE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE TWO LABOR GOVERNMENTS
IN CANBERRA AND ADELAIDE AS AGAINST THE
OBSTRUCTIONISM OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT, I
. r i i
r : r
I:
1-j-
; r . F-
N.. -9-
S/ -t IN TERMS OF SHEER POLITICS, DON'T FORGET THAT THE
NIEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT IS SHOWN BY THE POLLS TO
BE THE MOST UNPOPULAR OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS,
S" AND THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT IS FAR AND
AWAY THE MOST POPULAR..
' KNOCKING CANBERRA HAS NOT PAID OFF FOR MR LEWIS.
IF IT WON'T WORK FOR AN ANTI-LABOR GOVERNMENT, IT'S
NOT GOING TO WORK FOR ANY SECTION OF OUR OWN PARTY,
THE OBSTRUCTION FROM NEW SOUTH WALES RANGES FROM PETTY
CUSSEDNESS ON LITTLE MATTERS, TO GROSS IRRESPONSIBILITY
. ON GREAT MATTERS, THERE ARE THINGS LIKE THE REFUSAL
TO LET A NEW SOUTH WALES OFFICIAL TRAVEL ON A CULTURAL
MISSION TO CHINA, OR THE REFUSAL TO LET AN OFFICIAL
: ATTEND A MEETING OF A SUB-COMMITTEE OF THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE FOR THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION.
BUT THE TWO GREAT MATTERS, IN TERMS OF THEIR EFFECT
ON THE PEOPLE AND THEIR POTENTIAL EFFECT ON THE STATE'S
FINANCIAL POSITION ARE HOSPITALS AND RAILWAYS. THERE
AGAIN, MARK THE CONTRAST WITH SOUTH AUSTRALIA, _. 1
i 1
I 
-; 7 LET ME TELL YOU A LITTLE OF THE STORY OF OUR PROPOSAL
TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE NEW SOUTH WALES
RAILWAYS. IT WAS AN OFFER MADE IN THE POLICY SPEECH
OF 1972, IN FEBRUARY 1973 I WROTE TO SIR ROBERT
ASKIN CONFIRMING THAT PROMISE, IN MARCH HE
AGREED TO OFFICIAL DISCUSSIONS, WITHOUT PRIOR
COMMITMENT, TO CLARIFY THE ISSUES INVOLVED IN SUCH
A TRANSFER. ' WHEN MR LEWIS BECAME PREMIER, HE
BROKE OFF THOSE DISCUSSIONS. THEY HAD BEEN
FRUITFUL AND CONGENIAL BUT HE BROKE THEM OFF.
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, WE REACHED AGREEMENT FOR THE
TRANSFER LAST YEAR. THE CONTRASTING RESULT
IS THAT SOUTH AUSTRALIA SAVES $ 10 MILLION
A YEAR AND NEW SOUTH WALES CONTINUES TO HAVE TO
BEAR AN $ 80 . MILLION ANNUAL LOSS ON ITS RAILWAYS, o. 
JUST BEAR THAT IN MIND NEXT WEEK WHEN MR LEWIS
SQUAWKS ABOUT SO-CALLED CENTRALISM IN CANBERRA
AND CANBERRA'S ALLEGED NEGLECT OF THE STATES.
THERE'S NOTHING PARTICULARLY " CENTRALIST" ABOUT
NATIONALLY-OPERATED RAILWAYS IT'S HARDLY
A MATTER OF PHILOSOPHY ITS JUST COMMONSENSE.
IN EVERY OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEM IN THE WORLD,
RAILWAYS ARE RUN NATIONALLY,
OUR RATIONAL APPROACH IS SHARED BY OUR PARTNERS
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, THE SAME OPPORTUNITY
FOR BETTER SERVICES, FOR FAIRER AND SOUNDER
FINANCES, IS THERE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES. THE
PARTY HERE SHOULD SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
SUPPORT OUR INITIATIVES, IT OFFERS A POSITIVE
APPROACH TO THE QUESTION OF FEDERAL-STATE
FINANCIAL RELATIONS, A WAY THROUGH THE CARPING
AND CONFRONTATION WHICH IS THE ESSENCE OF
OUR OPPONENT'S APPROACH.
L u i. t 
-11-
THE NEW SOUTH W'ALES GOVERNMENT'S RECORD ON HOSPITALS
SIS EQUALLY OBSTRUCTIVE, A LITTLE MORE THAN A MONTH
BEFORE MEDIBANK WAS SCHEDULED TO COME INTO OPERATION
!. ON THE 1ST JULY, AFTER MONTHS OF NEGOTIATIONS,
MR LEWIS CAME UP WITH A NEW SET OF PROPOSALS THAT
WOULD STRIKE AT THE FOUNDATION OF OUR HOSPITAL PROGRAM.
IN PARTICULAR, THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT IS TRYING
TO SABOTAGE THE BASIC PRINCIPLE. THAT ANY PERSON IN
NEED OF HOSPITAL TREATMENT SHOULD BE ABLE TO RECEIVE THE
BEST AVAILABLE TREATMENT FREE OF COST AND FREE OF
CONTRIBUTION TO A MEDICAL FUND, THE NEW SOUTH WALES
GOVERNMENT HAS RESORTED TO A VERY EXTENSIVE PROPAGANDA
CAMPAIGN TO JUSTIFY THIS SABOTAGE.
" THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY ASPECT OF THIS CAMPAIGN AND
MOST OF THE CAMPAIGNS WAGED BY OPPONENTS OF OUR
PROGRAM IS THAT THEY ALL RELY ON THE IDEA THAT THE
SAUSTRALIAN PUBLIC KNOWS NOTHING AND REMEMBERS NOTHING.
NEW TERRORS ARE DRUMMED UP TO CONDEMN PROPOSALS WHfCH
ARE IN FACT VERY FAMILIAR TO THE PEOPLE. i
a ' T 
-12-
FOR INSTANCE, WHY SHOULD A PUBLIC LONG ACCUSTOMED
TO STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICES BE TERRIFIED AT
THE PROSPECT OF AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
CORPORATION? FOR ALL THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
DOLLARS SPENT ON THAT CAMPAIGN, IDON'T BELIEVE THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE WERE A BIT IMPRESSED.
THE CAMPAIGN DIDN'T GET OFF THE GR OUND,
NCW THERE 13 THIS LAST MINUTE ATTEMPT TO SABOTAGE
fIEDIBANK, THE PLAIN FACT IS THAT AS FAR AS
HOSPITAL BEDS A"-RE CONCERNED, OUR PROGRAM WILL SIMPLY
RE-ESTABLISH WHAT EXISTED AND WORKED VERY SATISFACTORILY
UNDER THE CHIFLEY GOVERNMENT -THE PROVISION OF FREE
HOSPITAL TREATMENT IN PUBLIC WARDS,, FUNDED ON A
50-50 BASIS BETWEEN THE FEDERAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS. 
I 7-77-
I SAID BEFORE THAT THE GREAT THRUST OF OUR PROGRAM IS
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS
AND PUBLIC TRANSPORT, WE ARE STRIVING FOR SOCIAL
EQUALITY. EQUALLY FUNDAMENTAL IS THE STRUGGLE FOR POLITICAL EQUALITY.
IT IS EXTRAORDINARY HOW WE STILL ACCEPT THE DENIAL OF
THIS BASIC RIGHT, A RIGHT WHICH HAS BEEN PART OF THE
DEMOCRATIC RHETORIC FOR A CENTURY OR MORE YET
-NEVER TRANSLATED INTO REALITY IN AUSTRALIA. IT IS
EXTRAORDINARY HOW EVEN PEOPLE IN OUR OWN PARTY FAIL
TO BE INCENSED BY THIS DENIAL, I
TWO WEEKS AGO THE SENATE AGAIN REJECTED THE NEW
REDISTRIBUTION A REDISTRIBUTION WHICH ON ANY GROUND
IS THE FAIREST EVERY PRESENTED TO ANY AUSTRALIAN
PARLIAMENT.
WE HAD TWO DEBATES ON THE REDISTRIBUTIONn FIRST WE
SUBMITTED THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS' PROPOSALS TO
THE PARLIAMENT. WHEN THEY WERE REJECTED WE SUBMITTED
THEM IN THE FORM OF BILLS. BOTH THE PROPOSALS AND THE
BILLS ARE DESIGNED TO EFFECTUATE THE LAW OF THE LAND
A LAW ESTABLISHED AT THE JOINT SITTING OF BOTH HOUSES
OF THE PARLIAMENT LAST AUGUST. THE LAW-SAYS THE NUMBERS
OF VOTERS IN EACH ELECTORATE WITHIN A STATE SHALL NOT
VARY BY MORE THAN 10% ABOVE OR BELOW THE QUOTA IN THAT
STATE,'
~ rt r 
S14-
IN BOTH THE DEBATES, NO SENIOR LIBERAL INTERVENED.
THE LEAqERS LEFT IT UP TO THE MEMBER FOR BENNELONG
NO A HOUSEHOLD WORD TO ARGUE THEIR CASE, SUCH
S-AS .: IT WAS, AND NO WONDER. HOW COULD MR FRASER
JUSTIFY TO HIS OWN SUPPORTERS THAT THEIR VOTE IN
MITCHELL IS TO BE WORTH HALF THAT OF A PERSON VOTING
SIN DARLING? . THAT ILLUSTRATES THE REAL POINT ABOUT
ANY ELECTION HELD ON THE EXISTING BOUNDARIES.
. THERE IS NO PENALTY FOR LABOR VOTERS AS AGAINST LIBERAL
VOTERS; . THE PENALTY IS SPREAD INDISCRIMINATELY. ON
SLABOR AND LIBERAL VOTERS ALIKE IF THEY HAVE. THE-.
SMISFORTUNE TO LIVE IN THE PLACES WHERE MOST AUSTRALIANS,
LIBERAL OR LABOR, LIVE.
THROUGHOUT THE DEBATES THERE WAS NEVER ANY SUGGESTION
THAT THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS HAD NOT DONE A
SCRUPULCUSLY FAIR JOB, IN EACH STATE THE COMMISSIONERS
BENT OVER BACKWARDS TO BE FAIR, THE OBJECTION TO THEIR
WORK WAS THAT THEY ADHERED TO THE LAW OF THE LAND, AS
THEY WERE DUTY BOUND TO DO, THE OBJECTION TO THE
REDISTRIBUTION WAS NOT ON ANY GROUNDS OF FAIRNESS . IT
WAS AN OBJECTION TO ANY REDISTRIBUTION AT ALL. i I 
THE FATE OF THE REDISTRIBUTION PROPOSALS IS THE CLASSIC
EXAMPLE OF HOW A VERY SMALL BUT VERY VOCAL PRESSURE GROUP
CAN SET ASIDE THE CLEAR WILL AND INTERESTS OF THE MAJORITY,
IN THIS CASE ALREADY'EMBODIED IN THE LAW OF THE LAND.
THE COUNTRY PARTY MADE ALL THE RUNNING AND WAS. ABLE TO
GET ITS WAY EVEN THOUGH THE LIBERAL PARTY IS EVERY BIT
AS MUCH A VICTIM OF THE PRESENT MALAPPORTIONMENT AS THE
LABOR PARTY.
WE HAVE TO REMEMBER HOWEVER THAT A GREAT DEAL OF OUR
PROGRAM IS THREATENED IN THE SAME WAY THE OPPONENTS ARE
POWERFUL, WELL-ORGANISED ENTRENCHED; THE BENEFICIARIES
ARE IN GENERAL NOT SO WELL ORGANISED, SO ARTICULATE,
THEREFORE WE HAVE TO BE THE SPOKESMEN, NOT JUST IN
OUR OWN CAUSE, BUT IN THEIR CAUSE,
TAKE THE CASE OF THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE SPONSORED BY
THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIAN GOVERNMENTS AGAINST
THE CONSTITUTIONAL VALIDITY OF THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN AND THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT SCHEME.
SOME 60 SPECIFIC PROGRAMS ARE IMPERILLED BY THE CHALLENGE.
WHAT EACH HAS IN COMMON IS THAT THEY ARE DESIGNED TO
BENEFIT THE WEAK AND UNDERPRIVILEGED IN THE COMMUNITY
THE OLD, THE HANDICAPPED, ABORIGINES, MIGRANTS. 
-16-
STATE PERMIERS HAVE A READY MADE FORUM IN THE CAPITAL
CITY-BASED NEWSPAPERS. THE PEOPLE ON WHOSE BEHALF
WE ACT, DO NOT HAVE ANY SUCH VOICE. IF WE DON'T SPEAK
UP FOR THEM, NO ONE ELSE WILL, IF WE DON'T SUPPORT
AND DEFEND OUR OWN PROGRAM, NO-ONE ELSE WILL.
THE INSURANCE OFFICES ARE WELL-ORGANISED, POLICY HOLDERS
ARE NOT. THE AMA, IS ARTICULATE. THE MILLION
AUSTRALIANS WHO CANNOT AFFORD HEALTH INSURANCE ARE NOT,
WE HAVE IN OUR'RANKS MANY OF THE MOST ARTICULATE PEOPLE
IN AUSTRALIA. IT IS OUR DUTY TO MOBILISE OUR
OWN RESOURCES AND TALENTS IN DEFENCE OF THE PROGRAM. I 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E, G. lIWHITLAM, P, P,,
TO THE 1975 ANNUAL STATE CONVENTION,
OF THE A, L. P, SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH,
ADELAIDE, SUNDAY 15 JUNE 1975
FOR MANY YEARS I HAVE HAD THE PLEASURE OF ADDRESSING
YOUR ANNUAL STATE CONVENTION, IT IS NOT A PLEASURE
I WOULD READILY FORGO, SOUTH AUSTRALIA IS THE STATE:.
THAT BEST EXEMPLIFIES THE SUCCESS OF LABOR'S POLICIES.
IT'S HERE IN THIS PROGRESSIVE AND ENLIGHTENED STATE....
THAT WE SEE THE REAL FRUITS OF A GREAT LABOR PARTNERSHIP.
IT's A PARTNERSHIP THAT INVOLVES ALL OF US.-OUR PARTY,
YOUR BRANCH, SON DUNSTAN'S GOVERNMENT, MY GOVERNMENT,
OUR OFFICIALS, OUR RESPECTIVE DEPARTMENTS. YESTERDAY
IN SYDNEY I FAD SOMETHING TO SAY TO THE NEW SOUTH WALES
BRANCH ABOUT THE STATE GOVERNMENT'S OBSTRUCTION AND
THE COST OF THAT OBSTRUCTION TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW SOUTH
WALES A COST MEASURED IN POOR SOCIAL PLANNING AND
DETERIORATING PUBLIC SERVICES, HERE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WE CAN SEE THE OTHER SIDE OF THE COIN, IE CAN SEE
WHAT CAN BE ACHIEVED BY READY COOPERATION BETWEEN
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE STATES, i r 
SINCE I LAST SPOKE TO YOU THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS MADE GREAT PROGRESS WITH ITS PLANS FOR
A BETTER AND FAIRER SOCIETY, I DON'T WANT TO GLOSS
OVER OUR DIFFICULTIES, BUT EQUALLY THERE IS NO POINT
IN UNDERRATING OUR SUCCESSES. I WAS TAKEN TO TASK
IN THE PRESS THE OTHER DAY FOR POINTING TO THE REAL
GAINS IN INCOMES MADE BY EMPLOYEES UNDER A LABOR
GOVERNMENT, NO ONE SUPPOSES THAT MONEY INCOMES ARE ALL
THAT MATTER IN DETERMINING LIVING STANDARDS LEAST
S OF ALL WOULD A LABOR GOVERNMENT SUBSCRIBE TO THAT
VIEW, BUT THE FACT REMAINS THAT UNDER LABOR THE
REAL GAINS IN PERSONAL INCOME HAVE BEEN SUBSTANTIAL
M; ORE THAN 7 PERCENT SINCE WE CAME TO OFFICE.
PENSIONERS AND THOSE MOST IN NEED HAVE HAD BIGGER GAINS
IN THEIR REAL INCOMES THAN EVER BEFORE. A LABOR
GOVERNMENT A TRUE LABOR GOVERNMENT NATURALLY TAKES
PRIDE IN ANY REAL SHIFT IN WEALTH TOWARDS THOSE SECTORS
OF THE COMMUNITY WHO ARE MOST IN NEED, AND OF COURSE
ALONG WITH THIS IMPROVEMENT IN MONEY INCOMES THERE HAS
BEEN A VAST AND PERMANENT EXTENSION OF THE RANGE OF
SERVICES AND OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE TO ALL
AUSTRALIANS THE SORT OF OPPORTUNITIES THAT MAKE
FOR A GENUINELY FAIR SOCIETY, FOR TRUE SOCIAL EQUITY, 
WE WOULDN'T BE HUMAN IF WE WEREN'T WORRIED BY
THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS WE SHARE WITH ALL OTHER
COMPARABLE COUNTRIES, IT IS NO EASY TASK TO FRAME
A NATIONAL BUDGET WHILE THESE PROBLEMS CONTINUE,
RECENTLY I HAVE DRAWN ATTENTION TO THE SIGNS OF
IMPROVEMENT ALREADY APPARENT IN THE ECONOMY
THE UPTURN IN THE DEMAND FOR HOUSING, THE CONTINUING
FALL IN UNEMPLOYMENT, THE GROWTH IN CONSUMER DEMAND,
WHAT WE ARE DETERMINED TO DO IN OUR EFFORTS TO
BEAT INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT-IS PROTECT THOSE WHO
. MOST NEED PROTECTION. A LABOR GOVERNMENT IS ESSENTIALLY
: A GOVERNMENT THAT CARES FOR PEOPLE ESPECIALLY
. THOSE WHO STAND IN GREATEST NEED. THIS HAS BEEN
.: THE THEME OF ALL OUR EFFORTS, ALL OUR MEASURES, ALL OUR
PRIORITIES, WE'LL STAND BY THAT, IT'S-ALL TOO EASY TO
BE DISHEARTENED BY THE PROBLEMS WE FACE, THIS IS. NOT
THE FIRST TIME LABOR HAS BEEN IN POWER IN A TIME OF
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS, THIRTEEN MONTHS AGO WE
FOUGHT AN ELECTION IN A TIME OF IMMENSE ECONOMIC
DIFFICULTY; WE WON THAT ELECTION; WE CAN WIN AGAIN,
I CANNOT STRESS TOO OFTEN THE BASIC STRENGTH OF THE ECONOMY,
THE STRENGTH AND ABUNDANCE OF OUR NATURAL RESOURCES,
THE IMMENSE GCODWILL WE ENJOY AROUND THE WORLD,
L 
4
IN PUSHING AHEAD WITH OUT PROGRAMS W\ E NEED THE
COOPERATION OF THE STATES, THIS WEEK, AS YOU KNOW',
I SHALL BE MEETING DON DUNSTAN AND THE OTHER PREMIERS
IN CANBERRA AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE. I DON'T WANT
TO PREJUDGE THE OUTCOME OF OUR TALKS,
BUT THE POINT TO REMEMBER IN.
-THIS CONTEXT IS'JUST HOW MUCH THE? CAN SAVE, HOW
.:: MUCH THEY CAN EASE THEIR FINANCIAL BURDENS, BY
: COOPERATING WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN ITS
' SOCIAL PROGRAMS AND INITIATIVES, -THAT IS WHAT THE
LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS DONE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
IT'S NOT A QUESTION OF KNUCKLIMG UNDER OR GIVING WAY
TO CANBERRA, IT'S A MATTER OF GETTING TOGETHER OF
HEALTHY NEGOTIATION, OF READY COOPERATION IN A
SPIRIT OF TRUST AND GOODWILL. . r. s
fl': r
t
j: -lIc: T
r 1: 
THERE ARE TWO PRINCIPAL BURDENS ON ALL STATE
BUDGETS RAILWAYS AND HOSPITALS. OUR POLICIES ARE
DESIGNED TO RELIEVE THOSE BURDENS. IT'S WORTH
REMEMBERING THAT MEDIBANK, FOR EXAMPLE, INVOLVES
MUCH MORE THAN FREE MEDICAL INSURANCE. IT MEANS
A NEW DEAL FOR STATE HOSPITAL FINANCES, OFFICIALS
OF BOTH GOVERNMENTS HAVE BEEN WORKING STEADILY
. TOWARDS THIS AGREEMENT SINCE NEGOTIATIONS STARTED IN
OCTOBER. LAST YEAR. THE AGREEMENT IS NOW READY FOR
: SIGNINGA IT MEANS THAT THE NET COST OF OPERATING
::: iSOUTH AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC HOSPITALS WILL BE SHARED
. ON A 50-50 BASIS BETWEEN THE TWO GOVERNMENTS, I DON
HAVE TO REMIND YOU OF THE BENEFITS TO THE PUBLIC
OF THE HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK FREE STANDARD
WARD TREATMENT, FREE OUTPATIENT SERVICES, LOWER
HOSPITAL CHARGES FOR INTERMEDIATE AND PRIVATE WARDS,
AN ADDITIONAL $ 16 A DAY IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
PAYMENTS TO PRIVATE HOSPITALS FOR THEIR PATIENTS, x J ' rc . r-
1 -r-
:~ I2 F~-iL; ; iS; I
r
TT 
THOSE ARE BENEFITS FOR PATIENTS, FOR THE PEOPLE. THE
IMPORTANT THING FOR THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS A
SAVING OF $ 28 MILLION A YEAR UNDER THE MEDIBANK HOSPITAL
ARRANGEMENTS, MONEY WHICH THE STATE GOVERNMENT WILL BE
ABLE TO SPEND IN ANY AREA OF ITS RESPONSIBILITY, ONLY
ONE OTHER STATE TASMANIA WILL BE INTRODUCING THE
MEDIBANK HOSPITAL ARRANGEMENTS FROM 1 JULY, ALL THE
ANTI-LABOR STATES HAVE DITHERED AND DELAYED AT GREAT
COST TO THEIR STATE BUDGETS AND AT GREAT COST TO THE
WELFARE OF THEIR CITIZENS,
THE OTHER AREA WHERE WE ARE EASING SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S
FINANCIAL BURDENS IS RAILWAYS, THIS HAS BEEN A GREAT YEAR
OF ACHIEVEMENT AND INNOVATION FOR THE RAILWAYS IN AUSTRALIA,
BUT IT HAS BEEN A TIME OF SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENT FOR SOUTH
AUSTRALIA, ONE OF MY FIRST ACTS AS PRIME MINISTER WAS
TO WRITE TO D'C DUNSTAN SEEKING DISCUSSIONS ON OUR OFFER
TO ACCEPT A TRANSFER OF THE STATE RAILWAYS TO THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, THAT OFFER WAS MADE IN MY 1972
POLICY SPEECH, ' iE MADE RAPID PROGRESS IN NEGOTIATIONS,
THE PREMIER AND I SIGNED AN AGREEMENT ON 21 MAY TO TRANSFER
THE NON-METROPOLITAN RAILWAYS OF THIS STATE, AND THE
NECESSARY LEGI LATION HAS PASSED THE. t-HOUSEE -OF REP. RESENTATL'VES,
"' I
THERE WILL EE A NET FINANCIAL BENEFIT TO THE STATE'S
REVENUE OF $ 10 MILLION TO BE PAID BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ON OR BEFORE 1 JULY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA WILL BE RELIEVED OF
CAPITAL DEBTS ON HER TRANSFERRED RAILWAYS, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
WILL HAVE A SETTER RAILWAY SYSTEM. THE RIGHTS AND EMPLOYMENT
OF EVERY RAILWAY EMPLOYEE WILL BE PRESERVED,
I 
THERE IS MORE TO TELL YOU ABOUT RAILWAYS IN
SouTH AUSTRALIA, AND I SHALL RETURN TO IT IN A MOMENT,
BUT THE POINT I MAKE IS THIS: IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
WE HAVE HELPED TO RELIEVE THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF TWO
OF ITS TRADITIONAL BURDENS, AND REMEBER THAT WHAT
IE HAVE DONE FOR RAILWAYS AND HOSPITALS THIS YEAR WE
HAVE ALREADY DONE FOR WELFARE HOUSING AND UNIVERSITIES,
AT THE PREMIERS' CONFERENCE A YEAR AGO WE GAVE THE
STATES A VIRTUAL BLANK CHEQUE FOR THEIR WELFARE HOUSING..
NEEDS, THIS RESPONSIBILITY IS NOW SHOULDERED ENTIRELY
.: BY. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, AT THE JUNE 1974 PREMIERS'..
'. CONFERENCE,' SOUTH AUSTRALIA WAS ADVANCED $ 20 MILLION
FOR THE SOUTH. AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST IN 1974-75
AND $ 18 MILLION FOR LENDING TO MEANS TESTED APPLICANTS
FOR HOUSING LOANS THROUGH THE HOME BUILDERS' ACCOUNT
UNDER THE 1973, HOUSING AGREEMENT, IN ADDITION, UNIVERSITIES,
TEACHERS COLLEGES AND ADVANCED EDUCATION UNDER MY
GOVERNMENT ARE N'OW ALMOST ENTIRELY COMMONWEALTH
RESPONSIBILITIES. HAVE BEEN OVERWHELMINGLY GENEROUS
IN FUNDING THEM, AS WE HAVE WITH EDUCATION OF EVERY KIND,
I NOTICED IN THE " ADVERTISER" THIS WEEK THE PLAN FOR A
NEW TERTIARY EDUCATION CENTRE ON THE SITE OF THE EAST
END MARKET, IT'S A SUPERB SCHEME INCORPORATING THE
COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND THE INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY, IT WAS ONLY WELL DOWN IN THE REPORT THAT I
READ THAT THIS WAS-BEINLG FINANCED THROUGH AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES THE UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION AND
THE COMMISSION ON ADVANCED EDUCATION IN COOPERATION
WITH THE STATE GOVERNMENT, 
LET ME DEAL WITH ANOTHER AREA WHERE SOITH
AUSTRALIA HAS SHOWN HOW THE STATES CAN WORK IN COOPERATION
WITH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WHERE REAL PROGRESS
IS POSSIBLE AND REAL BENEFITS CAN ACCRUE TO THE PEOPLE.
TWO MONTHS AGO I HAD THE PLEASURE OF OPENING THE FIRST
HOME SITES PROVIDED BY THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND
COMMISSION AT HAPPY VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA WAS THE
FIRST STATE TO RESPOND TO THE PROPOSALS MY GOVERNMENT
MADE FOR LAND COMMISSIONS. OTHER STATES HAVE FOLLOWED
SUIT WITH VARYING DEGREES OF ENTHUSIASM BUT IT WAS
SOUTH AUSTRALIA THAT SHOWED THE WAY. IT'S VERY OBVIOUS
WHY THIS COOPERATION ' AS NEEDED IN TACKLING THE
PROBLEM OF LAND PRICES THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
THE NECESSARY FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
HAVE A JURISDICTION IN LAND MATTERS WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
DOES NOT. ' VE HAVE SOUGHT TO BRING TOGETHER FEDERAL
FINANCES AND S-ATE POWERS TO REMOVE THE EVIL
OF SPIRALLING LAND PRICES AND IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA-WE HAVE
SUCCEEDED IN DITNG SO, THE PRICE OF LAND IS THE SINGLE
LARGEST COMPCNENT N THE COST OF A HOME, OUR LAND
COMMISSION PROGRAM OPERATES ON A VERY SIMPLE AND
FUNDAMENTAL PLANNING PRINCIPLE ADEQUATE LAND SUPPLY
IS NECESSARY T3 PREVENT LAND PRICE INCREASES AT TIMES OF
HIGH DEMAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN OUR SCHEME
FROM THE START, BLOCKS OF LAND ARE AVAILABLE FROM THE LAND
COMMISSION FOR ABOUT $ 1,000 LESS THAN COMPARABLE
BLOCKS IN OTHER PARTS OF ADELAIDE, ,1. i' 1 
I DON'T THINK ANYONE WOULD ARGUE THAT RAPID
URBANISATION HAS BROUGHT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ILLS
TO OUR CITIES. IT'S BEEN ONE OF THE GREAT POSTWAR
PROBLEMS IN EVERY DEVELOPED COUNTRY BUT ESPECIALLY IN
AUSTRALIA, TRANSPORT, SEWERAGE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT
SERVICES HAVE BEEN MADE MORE COSTLY AND DIFFICULT.
INDUSTRIES HAVE MET WITH HIGHER COSTS, THE ENVIRONMENT
HAS SUFFERED, AND PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS IN AUSTRALIA
JUST HAVEN'T COPED WITH THIS PROBLEM. THEY HAVEN'T
STRIED, TTr, DON DUNSTAN'S GOVERNMENT AND MY GOVERNMENT HAVE
INITIATED A SERIES OF POLICIES RELATING TO LAND USE AND
LAND PRICES, THE OBJECTIVE HAS BEEN TO REDUCE THE
CONSEQUENCES OF TOO RAPID URBANISATION. THIS YEAR THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALLOCATED APPROXIMATELY
$ 26 MILLION TO THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND COMMISSION,
BETWEEN ITS EST. ABLISHMENT IN NOVEMBER 1973 AND JUNE 1974, ' 2
IT HAS PURCHASED 1226 HECTARES OF LAND WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES
OF THE ADELAIDE METROPOLITAN AREA. THIS YEAR. IT IS
IMPLEMENTING A FURTHER PROGRAM TO ACQUIRE LAND FOR URBAN
DEVELOPMENT AND OPEN SPACES, THE COMMISSION HAS ENGAGED
THE SERVICES OF PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS IN THE FIELDS OF
PLANNING, ENGINEERiNG, SURVEYING AND VALUING, IT'S ALL
PART OF A SCHEMEi TO BRING TOGETHER THE THREE TIERS OF
GOVERNMENT AND INVOLVE LOCAL COMMUNITIES THEMSELVES
IN SOLVING THIS PROBLEM, IT'S A MODEL OF WHAT CAN BE DONE
TO IMPROVE OUR SURROUNDINGS AND MAKE LIFE BETTER FOR
AUSTRALIANS AND THEIR FAMILIES, 
DON'T IMAGINE THAT LAND COMMISSIONS ARE ALL
THAT CONCERN US IN THIS FIELD, IN MAKING AUSTRALIA A
BETTER PLACE TO LIVE IN WE ARE JUST AS CONCERNED WITH
RURAL AREAS. THE DEPARTMENT OFr URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT DEALS AS IMUCH WITH THE WELFARE OF REGIONS
AS IT DOES WITH CITIES, LAST YEAR WE APPROVED THE FIRST
DIRECT GRANTS EVER MADE BY AN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
TO LOCAL COUNCILS GRANTS TOTALLING $ 56 MILLION
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, $ 4,7 MILLION IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ALL BUT SEVEN OF THE 136 LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES IN THIS
STATE RECEIVED A GRANT,
WE HAVE SAFEGUARDED THE NATIONAL ESTATE, THE UNIQUE
AND BEAUTIFUL THINGS, NATURAL AND MAN-MADE, WORTH KEEPING
IN OUR COUNTRY, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA WORKS UNDER THE
NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAM AMOUNTING TO $ 886,000 WERE
APPROVED EARL:' THIS YEAR, I'E ARE PROVIDING ASSISTANCE
FOR ADELAIDE' ;-ATER TREATMENT SCHEME, WE ARE CATCHING
UP FURTHER ! WITH THE SEWERAGE BACKLOG IN ADELAIDE, IN THE
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
PROVIDED $ 5.7 ! ILLION TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA FOR THIS PURPOSE..
WE HAVE GIVEN $ 1 MILLION TO SOUTH AUSTRLIA TO DEVELOP
LEISURE AND RECREATION FACILITIES, WE HAVE UNIQUE PLANS
TO DEVELOP LE PARK IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A MODEL
COMMUNITY, IN; WHICH SCHOOLS, RECREATION AND HEALTH
FACILITIES WILL BE COORDINATED AND PLANNED IN CONSULTATION
WITH THE PEOPLE. WE HAVE ALLOCATED OVER $ 3 MILLION FOR THE
ANGLE PARK PROJECT. I' li ci
.1 L' 1 
OUR URBAN LOCAL ROADS PROGRAM IS DESIGNED TO
IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF RESIDENTIAL STREETS AND WILL
INCLUDE A NUMBER OF INNOVATIONS TO LIFT THE STANDARDS
OF ROADS IN URBAN AND PROVINCIAL CENTRES, THIS
YEAR AND IN THE NEXT TWO YEARS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
WILL GRANT SOUTH AUSTRALIA A TOTAL OF $ 102.71 MILLION
FOR ROADS OF ALL KINDS. WE ARE GETTING ON WITH OUR
PLANS FOR A NATIONAL HIGHWAYS SYSTEM LINKING ADELAIDE
WITH PERTH, MELBOURNE AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
NO-SERIOUS-EFFORT. WAS MADE BY PREVIOUS AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS TO DEVELOP A PROPER NATIONAL ROADS
. NETWORK. lWE ARE THE FIRST GOVERNMENT TO GET ON WITH
THE JOB AND WE'RE DOING IT BY COOPERATION WITH A LABOR
GOVERNMENT IN THIS STATE, IT IS ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF
WHAT WE CAN DO TOGETHER ONE MORE EXAMPLE OF A LABOR
STATE, A LABOR ' SGVERNMENT SHOWING THE WAY. SOUTH
AUSTRALIA HAS COOPERATED IN ALL OUR DISCUSSIONS ON
URBAN ARTERIAL ROADS. IN ADDITION, SOUTH AUSTRALIA HAS
READILY ENTERED INTO AGREEMENT WITH MY GOVERNMENT ON
THE UPGRADING OF ADELAIDE'S PUBLIC TRANSPORT. HERE IN
ADELAIDE YOU HAVE BETTER PUBLIC TRANSPORT THAN MOST STATES,
BUT IT OUGHT TO BE BETTER STILL, IT WILL BE BETTER,
TO DATE, URBAN TRANSPORT PROJECTS IN THIS STATE HAVE
ATTRACTED MORE THAN $ 15 MILLION IN AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE, 
IN THIS CONTEXT I TURN AGAIN TO THE RAILWAYS,
MORE THAN ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT, THE LABOR GOVERNMENT
HAS RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR A NATIONAL APPROACH TO THE
RAILWAYS THE NEED FOR A MODERN, EFFICIENT, NATIONAL
RAILWAY SYSTEM, NO STATE WILL BENEFIT MORE FROM SUCH
A SYSTEM THAN SOUTH AUSTRALIA ITS TRADE, BOTH EAST AND
WEST, WILL BE INVIGORATED AND STREAMLINED, I HAVE
MENTIONED THE TRANSFER OF THE NON-METROPOLITAN SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, IT
WAS THE FIRST STEP IN THE CREATION OF A NATIONAL
RAIL SYSTEM WORTHY OF A GREAT CONTINENT. THE
AUSTRALIAN ' ATIONAL RAILWAYS, WHICH. WE ARE SETTING UP
UNDER NEW LEGISLATION, WILL HAVE THE ORGANISATIONAL
STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONAL POWERS TO CONSOLIDATE THE
OLD COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS AND THE STATE RAILWAYS,
INTO A SINGLE SYSTEM, EQUIPPED WITH THE LATEST AND
BEST ROLLING SETCK. E HAVE ALREADY BEGUN WORK ON TWO
IMPORTANT NEW . AIL LINKS IN THIS STATE. Two MONTHS AGO
I ATTENDED THE INUGURATION OF THE TARCOOLA TO ALICE
SPRINGS RAILWAY, THE LARGEST RAILWAY PROJECT IN
AUSTRALIA FCO OVER HALF A CENTURY. THIS YEAR, TOO,
WE HAVE BEGUN 3UILDING THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY
BETWEEN ADELAIDE AND CRYSTAL BROOK, WHICH WILL REMOVE THE
LAST BREAK CF GAUGE BETWEEN THE MAINLAND CAPITALS, r
I. 
IN NO OTHER STATES HAS THERE BEEN SUCH A
MAGNIFICENT AND SUSTAINED RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT, I
COULD EXTEND THIS LIST WITHOUT DIFFICULTY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE CORPORATION, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HOUSING CORPORATION, THE LEGAL AID OFFICE, THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. WE CAN BE PROUD OF OUR RECORD.
IT'S ALL BEEN ACHIEVED UNDER LABOR, IT COULD ONLY BE
ACHIEVED UNDER LABOR, UNDER ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT THESE
THINGS WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE AND UNDER ANY
OTHER GOVERNMENT THEY WOULD BE CUT BACK OR DISMANTLED,
WE HAVE ALL SEEN THE EVIDENCE OF OPPOSITION
OBSTRUCTION IN THE PARLIAMENT, IN THE NON-LABOR STATES,
IN THE COURTS, IT WAS MADE VERY OBVIOUS I N THEIR
APPROACH TO THE RECENT REDISTRIBUTION AND I KNOW
ELECTORAL REFORM IS A MATTER OF VERY SPECIAL
IMPORTANCE TO T. E PARTY IN THIS STATE. DON DUNSTAN
HAS HAD A L. NGER BATTLE THAN MOST OF US TO GET FAIR
REPRESENTATICO FOR THE PEOPLE, IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT WE ARE STILL FIGHTING THAT BATTLE. OUR
REDISTRIBUTiON '; AS ACKNOWLEDGED TO BE THE FAIREST EVER
PRESENTED TO PARLIAMENT, IT WAS BASED ON OUR LEGISLATION
TO ESTABLISH ELECTORAL EQUALITY FOR EVERY AUSTRALIAN
WHEREVER HE LIVED, THAT LEGISLATION IWAS PASSED
BY THE JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT LAST YEAR; IT WAS ONE
OF THE PROPOSALS ON WHICH THE DOUBLE DISSOLUTION WAS
GRANTED; IT W: AS SPECIFICALLY ENDORSED BY THE PEOPLE,
YET THE LIBERALS, UNDER PRESSURE FROM THE COUNTRY PARTY,
REJECTED THIS OVERDUE AND NECESSARY REDISTRIBUTION,
THEY REJECTED IT EVEN IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA A STATE WHERE
THE COUNTRY PARTY HAS NO REPRESENTATION IN THE NATIONAL
PARLIAMENT, .. L1.
II -r l! i
II 
IASK Y(. U TO REP T ' E Cz4VAIGN OF
OBSTR'JCTION GOEI, ON 8-
i4' E FOUGHT AND DLFEATED
OVER A YEAR AGO, WE CA
THAT OUR MEAURES CAN
TRUE A. ND LAl BENEF
WE CAN POIN-MC' &gt; Ot
SHOW THE Au,--RA'? AN PIF
OTHER STATESE CAN-DOB
BETTER HOSPI-ALS CVEf
TRANSPORT, B,* UTTER PLAV.
OTH~ ER STATES CAP 4AVETiOGETHER,
TFJ GRZT
XCR ; mPORTA,: k7 AND)
7HNit hE-DIFF-IZU63IES VF ~~ K~ AC-C OT . TRJCTION
"! AT 2L . JCTION JUS-t
illS2PFLE blY PROVING
RMS WILl-BRING
0 Vp j-y
iXV e 74K_. " AN
' STV% " A K
FXT ~ iLR. ENT
T7ME TO -It'. NL
i'll ' 1L BE -REtiE. 3' zE . D ANI" Yi. ~ GEN ERA -, O~ ls
jF WE STICK TCI OUR GUV, 51 $ VW5,. AS~ i-l" S
'~'~ INHAND,. AND TAKE ifXP ' F Q PRCGRECS
IAVE ALREADY MADE -TV STAin.
7 NAT7 t4
-11. 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 19 JUNE 1975
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
THERE HAS BEEN MORE PREPARATION FOR THIS THAN FOR
OTHER MEETINGS OF AUSTRALIAN HEADS OF GOVERNMENT. THE
PREPARATION MUST BE HELPFULJ. OUR OFFICIALS HAVE MET. YOU
HAVE PROVIDED US WITH BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND) WITH A JOINT
STATEMENT OF YOUR PROPOSALS. WE HAVE RESPONDED TO THOSE
PROPOSALS AND HAVE INDICATED MATTERS WHICH WE SEE AS OPEN FOR
DISCUSSION TODAY. THIS MEETING WILL NOT REMOVE ALL THE
MISUNDERSTANDINGS OR THE DISAGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENTS, BUT THE PREPARATION MEANS THAT WE MEET
WITH A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE PROBLEMS BEFORE US. THIS
DEVELOPMENT IS ONE WHICH I HAVE ENCOURAGED AND IN WHICH YOU
HAVE ALL CO-OPERATED, AND I THANK YOU FOR THAT CO-OPERATION.
A CRUCIAL ITEM OF OUR AGENDA IS, OF COURSE, THE
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS. HOWEVER,
BEFORE TURNING TO THAT, I WANT TO REFER BRIEFLY TO CO-OPERATIVE
K~ jANNING AND REGIONALISM WHICH I HAVE PROPOSED FOR LATER
DISCUSSION. I MUST MAKE IT CLEAR THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
DOES NOT REGARD THE PRESENT APPROACH TO DETERMINING REVENUE
ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS AS SATISFACTORY. STATE EXPENDITURES
ARE LARGELY TAKEN AS GIVEN. THERE IS NO EXPLICIT CONSIDERATION o o / 2 
2,
OF PROPER BALANCE BETWEEN STATE PROGRAMS AM) RELATED AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS. INSTEAD, AND BY TRADITION, FINANCIAL
FACTORS ARE CONSIDERED LARGELY IN TERMS OF THE YEAR
IMMEDIATELY AHEAD.
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE SEEKING IN THE
LONGER TERN A MORE RATIONAL AND CO-ORDINATED SYSTEM OF ASSESSING
NEEDS, SETTING PRIORITIES AM) ALLOCATING RESOURCES IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR ONE BASED ON CO-OPERATION BETWEEN GOVERNMENTS. IT MAY
TAKE YEARS TO DEVELOP A NEW APPROACH OF THE KIM) W4E HAVE IN
MIND, OF THE KIM) DISCUSSED AMONG OUR OFFICIALS. BUT WE
BELIEVE A START SHOULD BE MADE NOW.
THE VIEW OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS THAT IN
SEEKING BETTER CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS IT WOULD BE
BEST TO BEGIN WITH PARTICULAR IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS WHERE THERE
IS A CLEAR NEED FOR CO-ORDINATION AM) WHERE EARLY PROGRESS SEEMS
POSSIBLE. THREE SUCH FUNCTIONS HAVE BEEN SUGGESTED IN THE
DISCUSSIONS AMONG OUR OFFICERS TRANSPORT, HEALTH AM) URBAN
DEVELOPMENT. LET ME ILLUSTRATE WHAT WE HAVE IN MIN) BY REFERRING
TO URBAN AM) REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT WHERE IMPORTANT FACTORS
DETERMINING DEVELOPMENT ARE PLANNED AM) FUNDED AT DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE RETICULATION OF TELECOMMNICATIONS. THE STATE SEMIGOVERNMENTAL
AM) LOCAL AUTHORITIES ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE / 3 
3.
RETICULATION OF WATER AND) SEWERAGE. THE NEED FOR OVERALL
CO-ORDINATION IS OBVIOUS.
MORE THAN $ 4,500 MILLION IS CURRENTLY BEING SPENT ON
TRANSPORT EACH YEAR AND THAT IS MORE THAN 12 PER CENT OF
GROSS NATIONAL EXPENDITURE. THE DECISIONS BY EACH LEVEL OF
GOVERNMENT ON THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO THE MODES OF
TRANSPORT FOR WHICH IT IS RESPONSIBLE SHOULD BE CONSISTENT
S WITH THE DECISIONS BY OTHER LEVELS IF THIS MONEY IS TO BE
WELL SPENT. WE BELIEVE THAT OUR DECISIONS ON THE ALLOCATION OF
RESOURCES TO AIRPORTS AND AIRWAYS FACILITIES SHOULD BE MADE
WITH KNOWLEDGE OF THE STATES? VIEWS ON THEIR PRIORITY RELATIVE
TO OTHER MODES OF TRANSPORT. SIMILARLY WE WOULD EXPECT THE
STATES' DECISIONS ON THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES TO PORTS TO
S BE MADE WITH KNOWLEDGE OF OUR VIEWS.
THERE HAVE BEEN IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENTS IN RECENT YEARS.
SINCE 1969 ROADS ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN BASED ON A SURVEY UNDERTAKEN
JOINTLY BY AUSTRALIAN AND STATE AUTHORITIES. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS NOW REPRESENTED ON STATE URBAN TRANSPORT PLANNING
BODIES. REGIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEES HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE PLANNING OF MAJOR AIRPORTS.
APART FROM PARTICULAR DEVELOPMENTS, THE AUSTRALIAN
TRANSPORT ADVISORY COUNCIL HAS BECOME THE MAJOR FORUM ON THE 4 
PROBLEMS OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT SERVICES, MAIN RAILWAY LINES AND)
ROADS. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS RECENTLY TAKEN THE
INITIATIVE IN INTRODUCING AVIATION MATTERS INTO ATAC, AND IN
SEEKING CONSIDERATION THERE OF THE QUESTION OF RESOURCE
ALLOCATION TO TRANSPORT GENERALLY. IT IS THIS LATTER
DEVELOPMENT WHICH WE BELIEVE SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED AND
ACCELERATED. I UNDERSTAND THAT ATAC WILL BE REVIEWING ITS
MACHINERY AT ITS MEETING NEXT MONTH. I SUGGEST WE SHOULD ASK
BOTH ATAC AND THE PORTS AND MARINE COUNCIL TO REPORT BACK TO
US ON HOW BEST TO PROCEED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF WIDER
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS OF THE KIND DESCRIBED.
A SUJMMARY OF POINTS OF POSSIBLE AGREEMENT ON
CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING HAS BEEN CIRCULATED TO YOU. I ASK YOU
TO NOTE TEAT THEY ARE SIMPLY INTENDED TO FORM A FRAME OF
REFERENCE AGAINST WHICH OFFICIALS AND MINISTERS CAN PROCEED
WITH FURTHER EXAMINATION IN THE MONTHS AHEAD SO THAT MORE
CONSIDERED REPORTS CAN BE PUT BEFORE US AT A FUTURE TIME.
THERE IS NO COMMITMENT INVOLVED IN AGREEING TO THIS
SET OF POINTS, OTHER THAN THAT FURTHER STUDY BE UNDERTAKEN
CO-OPERATIVELY BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS. ON THAT BASIS I WILL BE
ASKING THAT PREMIERS INDICATE THEIR AGREEMENT WHEN WE CONE TO
DISCUSSION OF THAT ITEM. 
REGIONAL POLICY THE AUSTRALIAN GOV'ERNMENT HAS LAID CONSIDERABLE STRESS
ON THE ADOPTION OF A REGIONAL APPROACH TO PLANNING AND DECISIONMAKING.
THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN AND THE AREA IMPROVEMENT
PROGRAM ARE EXAMPLES OF PROGRAMS DELIVERED ON A REGIONAL BASIS.
A STATEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S REGIONAL POLICY WAS
MADE BY ME ON 18 JUNE.
IN BRIEF, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ADOPTED, AS A
BASIS FOR ITS REGIONAL POLICY, THESE OBJECTIVES:
SERVICES AND PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
SHOULD BE PROVIDED ON A REGIONAL BASIS UYNLESS IT IS
INAPPROPRIATE TO DO SO, WITH REGARD TO EFFICIENCY,
ECONOMY AND EFFECTIVENESS.
REGIONAL BODIES OR ORGANISATIONS SHOULD BE GIVEN A
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THOSE SERVICES WHEREVER POSSIBLE,
NOTING THAT THIS RESPONSIBILITY MAY RANGE FROM DIRECT
INVOLVEMENT IN DECISION-MAKING THROUGH TO CONSULTATION..
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN PLANNING AND DECISION-MAKING
FOR, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF, PROGRAMS SHOULD BE
ENCOURAGED AND ASSISTED.
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED TO
DELEGATE TO REGIONAL BODIES MORE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THOSE STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS WHICH ARE
MOST APPROPRIATELY DELIVERED AT THE REGIONAL LEVEL AND
TO FOSTER PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S REGIONAL POLICY WILL NEED TO BE FLEXIBLE. THERE MAY 
BE DIFFERENCES FROM STATE TO STATE, AND REGION TO REGION,
BECAUSE OF PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES.
REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
I NOW SHOULD LIKE TO MAKE SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE
ECONOMIC CONTEXT IN WHICH THE REVIEW OF GENERAL REVENUE
ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS IS TO BE MADE. I SHALL THEN
DEAL MORE SPECIFICALLY WITH OUR VIEWS ON WHAT THE NEW
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS SHOULD BE.
IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MONTHS THE MAJOR ECONOMIES OF THE
WORLD SEVERELY AFFECTED BY THE OIL PRICE RISE AND THE
DESTABILISING EFFECTS OF THAT ON WORLD TRADE AND INVESTOR
CONFIDENCE HAVE BEEN STRUGGLING WITH THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF
RISING UNEMPLOYMENT AND RISING INFLATION. AUSTRALIA HAS NOT
BEEN ABLE TO INSULATE ITSELF FROM THAT WORLD SITUATION.
BUT IN AUSTRALIA AS IN OTHER COUNTRIES THE BATTLE IS
NOW ON TO RESTORE A MORE BALANCED ECONOMIC ORDER, WE ARE SEEING
ECONOMIC GROWTH BEGINNING AGAIN. THE RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT SEEMS
TO HAVE COME TO AN END AND 1975/ 76 PROMISES TO SEE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES ON THE INCREASE AGAIN. BUT INFLATION REMAINS DEEPSEATED.
FIRM AND RESPONSIBLE POLICIES WILL HAVE TO BE FOLLOWED
IF IT IS TO BE BROUGHT UNDER CONTROL. INFLATION AT A RATE
APPROACHING 20 PER CENT A YEAR IS INTOLERABLE. IT WRECKS
CONFIDENCE, DISCOURAGES PRIVATE INVESTMENT, ROBS ORDINARY PEOPLE
OF THE VALUE OF THEIR SAVINGS AND PREVENTS GOVERNMENTS FROM
PURSUING CONSISTENTLY AND IN A PROPERLY PLANNED WAY THE IMPORTANT
SOCIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMS WE WERE ELECTED TO PURSUE. 7 
SOME OF THE UNCERTAINTIES THAT SURROUNDED THE OUTLOOK FOR
INFLATION EARLIER THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN CLEARED BY THE DECISIONS OF
THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION IN'THE NATIONAL WAGE
AND METAL INDUSTRIES CASES. THOSE WERE RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS.
GOVERMENTS MUST ALSO DO ALL THEY CAN TO CREATE AN ECONOMIC CLIMATE
IN WHICH THE SUGGESTED WAGE DETERMINATION GUIDELINES HAVE THE
PROSPECT OF BEING ADHERED TO. A BIG RESPONSIBILITY ALSO FALLS ON
THE COMMUNITY ITSELF HERE AND, IN PARTICULAR, ON UNION LEADERSHIP.
THIS CONFERENCE COULD PLAY ITS PART BY EXPRESSING A FIRM
COMMITMENT BY GOVERNMENTS TO ACTION TO ENSURE OBSERVANCE OF THE
PRINCIPLES SET OUT IN THE NATIONAL WAGE CASE DECISION IN PARTICULAR
IN RESPECT OF PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT WITHIN GOVERNMENT CONTROL. WE WILL
BE DISCUSSING THIS UNDER THE AGENDA ITEM ON WORKING PARTIES ON
INFLATION BUT I MENTION HERE THAT I HAVE ASKED ALL MY MINISTERIAL
COLLEAGUES TO ACT CONSISTENTLY IN HANDLING WAGE CLAIMS WHICH ARISE
IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY IN THE LIGHT OF THE
NATIONAL WAGE CASE DECISION.
FOR OUR PART, WE AIM TO ENSURE THAT THE RECOVERY IN THE
ECONOMY STRENGTHENS AND CONTINUES BUT DOES NOT REACH A PACE THAT
ONCE AGAIN LEADS TO A SCRAMBLE FOR RESOURCES. AN ORDERLY RECOVERY
WILL HELP ACHIEVE A CLIMATE CONDUCIVE TO THE EXPANSION OF
INVESTMENT THAT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE CONTINUED PROSPERITY AND
GROWTH OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
LET ME NOW TURN BRIEFLY TO SOME OF THE FEATURES OF THE
CURRENT ECONOMIC SCENE.
THE OPENING MONTHS OF 1975 HAVE SEEN A STRONG RECOVERY
OF CONSUMER DEMAND. COUPLED WITH CONTINUED GROWTH OF GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURE AND EXPORTS THIS HAS RESULTED IN A SIZABLE INCREASE IN
TOTAL DEMAND IN SPITE OF DECLINING PRIVATE INVESTMENT.
HOWEVER, DEMAND GROWTH HAS BEEN MORE THAN MET BY SUPPLY FROM .18 
SWOLLEN STOCKS. AS A RESULT THERE HAS BEEN LITTLE INCENTIVE TO
INCREASE PRODUCTION AND EMPLOYMENT, BUT THIS IS EXPECTED TO
STRENGTHEN FROM NOW ON AS STOCKS RETURN TO MORE NORMAL LEVELS.
GROWTH IN THE VOLUME OF MONEY HAS BEEN EXCEPTIONALLY
STRONG. THE PERIOD OF SEASONAL TIGHTENING OF LIQUIDITY AT
THE END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR IS PASSING WITH ONLY MINOR
STRAINS ON FINANCIAL MARKETS; BANKS WILL ENTER THE SEASONAL
UPSWING WITH EXTREMELY HIGH LIQUIDITY RATIOS.
UNEMPLOYMENT SHOWED SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT IN MAY AND
A CONTINUED GRADUAL DECLINE IS CURRENTLY IN PROSPECT. THIS
IMPROVEMENT OWES MUCH TO EXPANDED GOVERNMENT SPENDING BUT
INDICATIONS ARE THAT THE TREND IN PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYMENT
WILL SOON TURN UPWARDS ONCE AGAIN.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS POSES NO IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS
BUT HERE AGAIN THE OUTLOOK FOR TWELVE MONTHS HENCE IS
DEPENDENT ON THE COURSE OF DEMAND AND INFLATION.
IT IS PLEASING TO NOTE THAT THE RATES OF INCREASE OF
BOTH PRICES AND WAGES SLOWED SOMEWHAT DURING THE MARCH QUARTER.
HOWEVER, EVEN THOUGH INFLATION RATES HAVE RECENTLY FALLEN
SOMEWHAT THEY REMAIN HIGH; THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX INCREASED
BY 3.6 PER CENT IN THE MARCH QUARTER AND 17.6 PER CENT IN THE
YEAR TO MARCH. SUCH RATES ARE MUCH TOO HIGH AT THE OUTSET OF
A RECOVERY PHASE AND FOLLOWING, AS THEY DO, SIMILAR RATES OF
INCREASE FOR THE PAST TWELVE MONTHS. ONE THING IS CLEAR
THERE HAS TO BE SOME ABATEMENT IN THE RATE OF INCREASE IN
GOVERNMENT SPENDING IF WE ARE TO GET OUT OF OUR PRESENT TROUBLES.
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON FINAL GOODS AND SERVICES
( AN APPROXIMATE MEASURE OF THE NATION'S PRODUCTION DIRECTLY 
CONSUMED BY THE GOVERNMENT SECTOR) HAS RISEN FROM 20 PER CENT
OF TOTAL NATIONAL EXPENDITURE TO 23 PER CENT IN THE COURSE OF
A YEAR. AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TOTAL BUDGET OUTLAYS INCLUDING
ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES HAVE RISEN FROM BETWEEN 24 AND
PER CENT OF GDP IN THE PRECEDING THREE YEARS TO OVER 30 PER
CENT THIS YEAR. IN 1974/ 75 IT WAS APPROPRIATE TO MAKE USE OF
RESOURCES THAT WOULD OTHERWISE HAVE REMAINED IDLE IN THE
PRIVATE SECTOR, BUT THE SHIFT OF RESOURCES TO THE PUBLIC
SECTOR CANNOT CONTINUE AT THAT RATE IF THE ECONOMY IS TO BE
GOT BACK ON ITS FEET. IN THE COMING FINANCIAL YEAR THERE WILL
NEED TO BE MODERATION IN PUBLIC SECTOR SPENDING.
I COME TO THE MAIN FINANCIAL QUESTIONS WHICH ARE OF
IMMEDIATE CONCERN TO THIS MEETING SPECIFICALLY THE MATTER OF
GENERAL REVENUE GRANTS IN 1975/ 76 AND SUBSEQUENT YEARS AND THE
MATTER OF THE LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS OF THE STATES AND THEIR
AUTHORITIES IN 1975/ 76.
THE PRESENT GENERAL REVENUE ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS
WERE ORIGINALLY SETTLED AT A PREMIERS' CONFERENCE [ N JUNE 1970.
AT THAT TIME THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT UNDERTOOK TO REVIEW
THE ARRANGEMENTS AFTER FIVE YEARS. ALTHOUGH THE LEGISLATION
UNDER WHICH THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ARE PAID -THE
STATES GRANTS ACT 1973/ 74 HAS INDEFINITE APPLICATION INTO
THE FUTURE, WE ACCEPT THE OBLIGATION TO REVIEW THE ARRANGEMENTS.
THE SPECIFIC QUESTION BEFORE US IS WHETHER ANY CHANGES IN
THE LEGISLATION TO WHICH I REFERRED ARE DESIRABLE. YOU HAVE
PROPOSED RADICAL CHANGES IN THAT LEGISLATION. YOUR MAIN
PROPOSALS ARE THAT THE BASE ON WHICH THE FORMUJLA GRANTS IN
1975/ 76 ARE CALCULATED BE INCREASED BY $ 350 MILLION AND THAT
THE PRESENT AVERAGE WAGES ELEMENT IN THE FORMULA BE REPLACED
BY A NEW PROGRESSION FACTOR EQUAL TO 1.~ 5 TIMES THE INCREASE 
IN AVERAGE WAGES EACH YEAR. I HAVE ALREADY INFORMED YOU
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DOES NOT ACCEPT THESE
PROPOSALS. WE REJECT THEM FOR FOUR I14TER-RELATED REASONS.
FIRST, WE REJECT THE CONCEPT ON WHICH THE STATES'
PROPOSALS ARE BASED THAT IS, THAT THE GRANTS ARRANGEMENTS
SHOULD BE BASED, IN EFFECT. ON REIMBURSEMENT OR COMPENSATION
FOR INCOME TAX FORGONE. THAT CONCEPT HAS LONG BEEN
ABANDONED. SUCCESSIVE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENTS HAVE TAKEN
THE VIEW THAT IT IS MORE LOGICAL AND APPROPRIATE THAT THE
0 GRANTS BE BASED ON THE STATES' FINANCIAL NEEDS RATHER THAN
ON MOVEMENTS IN ONE OF THE REVENUE SOURCES FROM W# HICH THE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ARE FINANCED.
SECONDLY, WE HAVE DOUBTS ABOUT THE WAY THE BASIC
CONCEPT HAS BEEN APPLIED. SPECIFICALLY, WE NOTE THAT THE
PROPOSALS ARE, AT LEAST IMPLICITLY, BASED ON THE ASSUMPTION
THAT PRESENT INCOME TAX RATES WILL REMAIN UNCHANGED
INDEFINITELY. GIVEN THE EFFECTS OF THE PROGRESSIVE RATE
STRUCTURE OF THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX AS WAGE AND SALARY RATES
RISE, THAT SEEMS TO US TO BE A QUITE UNJUSTIFIED ASSUMPTION.
WITHOUT DISCUSSING THIS ASPECT IN DETAIL, I CAN SUMMARISE
BY SAYING THAT IN OUR VIEW IT MEANS THAT THE STATES' PROPOSALS
ARE TOO GENEROUS EVEN BY THEIR OWN CRITERION.
THE THIRD REASON IS A MORE COMPLEX ONE AND I CAN
REFER TO IT ONLY BRIEFLY HERE. IT IS, IN ESSENCE. THAT
ACCEPTANCE OF THE STATES' PROPOSALS COULD INVOLVE, IN TIMES
OF RAPID INCREASES IN WAGE AND SALARY RATES, AN UNDUE TRANSFER
OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FROM THE STATES TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT, PARTICULARLY IN RESPECT OF BUSINESS UNDERTAKINGS
AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES. 000/ 11 
THE BURDEN OF FINANCING THESE SERVICES COULD WELL
HE INCREASINGLY SHIFTEI) FROM Ti'll' USES OF THE SERVI(: ES. TO
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BUIDGET AND THENCE TO TAXPAYIElRS
IN GENERAL, WITIH THE SERVI]( 1CES IN OUESTION BECOMING, I N THAT
SENSE, MORE AND MORE UNECONOMIC. THE PRINCIPLE THAT THE
USER PAYS SHOULD SURELY APPLY TO TIHESE SERVICES JUST AS TO
POSTAL AND OTHER SUCH SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. FINALLY, ALTHOUGH THE COSTS OF THE STATES'
PROPOSALS CANNOT BE PREDICTED ACCURATELY ( AS THEY WILL
DEPEND ON FUTURE MOVEMENTS IN POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES),
IT IS CLEAR THAT THEY WOULD BE FAR BEYOND WHAT COULD
REASONABLY BE EXPECTED TO BE BORNE BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S BUDGET. EVEN ON MODEST ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT
MOVEMENTS IN POPULATION AND AVERAGE WAGES, THE ADDITIONAL
GRANTS RESULTING FROM THE STATES' PROPOSALS WOULD RUN INTO
MANY THOUSANDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS OVER A FIVE YEAR AGREEMENT.
ONE PARTICULAR POINT THAT WE HAVE NOTED IN THIS
GENERAL BUDGETARY CONTEXT IS THAT THE STATES' PROPOSALS APPEAR
TO INVOLVE ADDITIONAL AJSTRAIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS IN 1975/ 76
SU'FFICIENT TO MEET, AND ON THE FIGURES GIVEN TO US, POSSIBLY
MORE THAN MEET, THE STATES' PROSPECTIVE BUDGETARY " GAPS" IN
THAT YEAR ( ON THE BASIS OF EXISTING RATES OF TAXES AND CHARGES
AND PROJECTEID EXPENDITURE 1, EVELS). PARTICULARLY IN THE LIGHT
TIE AUSTIRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S OWN SEVERE BUDGETARY P* ROB,: lMS
TIIAT ) lDO: NSO T SELEM TO US TO BE REASONABLE.
ALTHOUGH THE AUSTRAIIAN GOVERNMENT THUS DOES NOT
ACCEPT THE STATES' PROPOSALS, Wt BELIEVE NEVERTHELESS THAT / 12 
THERE IS A CASE FOR AN INCREASE IN THE LEVELS OF THE GRANTS
IN 1975/ 76 BEYOND THOSE WHICH WOULD BE YIELDED BY THE
EXISTING FORMULA AND THAT THERE IS A CASE FOR AN IMPROVEMENT
IN THE ANNUAL GROWTH PRODUCED BY THAT FORMULA.
IN COMING TO THAT JUDGEMENT WE HAVE HAD A NUMBER
OF CONSIDERATIONS IN MIND. NOTABLE AMONGST THEM HAS BEEN OUR
DESIRE TO ELIMINATE, OR AT THE VERY LEAST TO REDUCE AS FAR
AS POSSIBLE, WHAT HAS BECOME KNOWN AS THE ANNUAL " WRANGLE"
BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS.
WE HAVE OBSERVED IN THIS CONNECTION THAT OVER THE
LAST FIVE YEARS ASSISTANCE TOTALLING OVER $ 800 MILLION HAS
BEEN PROVIDED TO THE STATES OVER AND ABOVE THAT WHICH WOULD
HAVE BEEN YIELDED HAD THE ORIGINAL ARRANGEMENTS BEEN ADHERED
TO THAT FIGURE, INCIDENTALLY, EXCLUDES ABOUT $ 600 MILLION
IN ADDITIONAL GRANTS RESULTING FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S AGREEMENT TO COMPENSATE THE STATES FOR LOSS OF
RECEIPTS DUTY. OUR PROPOSALS ON THESE AND OTHER FINANCIAL MATTERS
ARE SPELLED OUT IN DETAIL IN A DOCUMENT WHICH WILL BE
CIRCULATED AT THE CONCLUSION OF THIS SPEECH, IN BRIEF, THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS OFFERING TO:-
INCREASE THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS ABOVE
WHAT THEY WOULD BE IN 1975/ 76 ON THE BASIS OF
EXISTING LEGISLATION BY A TOTAL OF $ 200 MILLION;
IMPROVE THE SUBSEQUENT RATE OF GROWTH OF THE
GRANTS BY INCREASING THE PRESENT BETTERMENT
FACTOR OF 1.8 PER CENT TO 3 PER CENT. / l 3 
13
THERE WILL BE CLAIMS THAT THE INCREASE IN THE
BETTERMENT FACTOR BY 1.2 PER CENT TO 3 PER CENT DOES
NOT REPRESENT A VERY SIGNIFICANT CHANGE. HOWEVER, GIVEN
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS, THE
EFFECTS, PARTI CULARLY GIVEN THAT THEY WOULD BE CUMULATIVE
OVER THE YEARS, WOULD IN FACT BE SUBSTANTIAL. THE PRECISE
EFFECTS OF OUR PROPOSALS CANNOT BE ESTIMATED. AS YOU WILL
APPRECIATE, THEY WILL DEPEND ON FUTURE MOVEMENTS IN AVERAGE
WAGES AND POPULATION. ON THE BASIS OF CERTAIN ASSUMPTIONS
ABOUT WAGES AND POPULATION GROWTH, HOWEVER, WE ESTIMATE
THAT THE EFFECT OF OUR PROPOSALS WILL BE TO INCREASE THE
GRANTS, OVER THE FIVE YEARS BEGINNING IN 1975/ 76, BY
SOMETHING IN THE ORDER OF $ 2,200 MILLION. OF THIS, THE
INCREMENT TO THE 1975/ 76 GRANTS WOULD ACCOUNT FOR AROUND
$ 1,500 MILLION AND THE IMPROVEMENT TO THE BETTERMENT FACTOR
FOR AROUND $ 700 MILLION.
I EMPHASISE THAT THIS LARGE GAIN WILL BE
ON TOP OF THE GROWTH IN ASSISTANCE FLOWING FROM THE
PRESENT ARRANGEMENT. AS AN INDICATION OF THE GROWTH
PRODUCED BY THE PRESENT FORMULA IT IS ESTIMATED THAT
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS IN 1975/ 76 WILL BE AROUND
$ 600 MILLION HIGHER THAN IN 1974/ 75 EVEN WITHOUT THE
IMPROVEMENTS WE HAVE PROPOSED.
THESE PROPOSALS, WHEN-ADDED TO OTHER INITIATIVES ./ 14 
14.
WHICH THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN IN THE FIELD
OF FEDERAL-STATE FINANCES, OR IN AREAS AFFECTING THOSE
FINANCES, REPRESENT VERY RADICAL CHANGES INDEED. IN
PARTICULAR I HAVE IN MIND THAT IN ASSESSING THE STATES'
OVERALL FINANCIAL POSITION ACCOUNT MUST BE TAKEN OF OUR
ASSUMPTION OF FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCING
TERTIARY EDUCATION, THE NEW OR EXPANDED PROGRAMS OF
SPECIFIC ASSISTANCE OVER A WIDE RANGE OF ACTIVITIES
FOR WHICH THE STATES PREVIOUSLY HAD SOLE OR MAIN
RESPONSIBILITY, OUR OFFERS TO TAKE OVER THE STATES'
RAILWAYS, AND THE " MEDIBANK" SCHEME FOR SHARING THE
RUNNING COSTS OF PUBLIC HOSPITALS, AS WELL AS THE
PROPOSALS IN RELATION TO REVENUE GRANTS WHICH I HAVE
JUST OUTLINED. IN RESPECT OF TWO OF THESE MATTERS MEDIBANK
AND RAILWAYS NOT ALL OF THE STATES HAVE TAKEN ADVANTAGE
OF OUR OFFERS AND THEIR BUDGETS, RELATIVE TO THOSE STATES
WHICH HAVE, WILL SUFFER ACCORDINGLY.
THE PLAIN FACT IS THAT IF ALL STATES ACCEPTED
OUR OFFERS IN RELATION TO MEDIBANK AND THE TRANSFER
OF RAILWAYS THEIR BUDGETARY PROSPECTS, BOTH SHORT AND
LONG TERM, WOULD BE VERY MUCH BETTER INDEED THAN THEY
ARE NOW. 
WE HAD HOPED THAT ALL THE STATES WOULD HAVE ENTERED THE
HOSPITAL SIDE OF MEDIBANK FROM 1 JULY 1975, UNDER THE PROPOSED
HOSPITAL AGREEMENTS WE WOULD HAVE ASSISTED THE STATES TO THE
EXTENT OF 50 PER CENT OF THE NET OPERATING COSTS OF PUBLIC
HOSPITALS. TASMANIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA SAW THE VALUE OF WHAT
WE WERE OFFERING AND WE HAVE ENTERED INTO AGREEMENTS WITH THEM.
WE HOPE THAT QUEENSLAND WILL FOLLOW. NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA
AND WESTERN AUSTRALIA, INSTEAD OF HELPING US EXPEDITE THE
INTRODUCTION OF THE SCHEME IN THEIR STATES, AS LATE AS
MAY 1975 WERE WRITING TO ME PROPOSING NEW AGREEMENTS AGREEMENTS
THAT I INFORMED THEM ON 12 JUNE WERE COMPLETELY UNACCEPTABLE.
WITH GREATER CO-OPERATION THE HOSPITAL SYSTEMS 01" THOSE STATES
WOULD BE BENEFITING FROM MANY MILLIONS OF DOLLARS PROVIDED BY THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
NONE OF YOU NEED REMINDING OF THE MAJOR BUDGETARY BURDENS
THAT ARE CAUSED BY THE LOSSES OF YOUR RAILWAYS SYSTEMS, I AM TOLD
THAT THE ESTIMATED DEFICITS FOR THE RAIL SYSTEMS IN 1974-75 EXCEED
$ 400 MILLION THREE TIMES AS MUCH AS THREE YEARS AGO CLEAR
EVIDENCE OF THE HIGH PRICE AUSTRALIA AS A NATION, AND EACH STATE
GOVERNMENT, IS PAYING FOR THE UNPLANNED, UNCO-ORDINATED APPROACH
TO RAIL TRANSPORT AND INDEED TRANSPORT GENERALLY, UNLIKE AUSTRALIA,
OTHER FEDERAL SYSTEMS OPERATE THEIR RAILWAYS ON A NATIONAL BASIS,
TASMANIA IS NOW TO BE RELIEVED OF THIS WORRY, IT WILL
ALSO RECEIVE POSITIVE FINANCIAL BENEFITS BECAUSE THE OFFSET TO ITS
FORMULA GRANTS BASE WILL BE LESS THAN THE RAILWAYS DEFICIT
OF WHICH IT WILL BE RELIEVED, TASMANIA'S NET GAIN
WILL BE $ 303 MILLION. THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS SOUGHT
A SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT IN RESPECT OF ITS NON-METROPOLITAN RAILWAY
SYSTEM ITS NET GAIN TO THE " BASE" WOULD BE $ 25 MILLION. / 16 
I STATED IN MY 1972 POLICY SPEECH THAT MY GOVERNMENT
WOULD ACCEPT THE OFFERS OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIAN
PREMIERS FOR A TRANSFER OF THEIR STATE RAILWAY SYSTEMS. DESPITE
A FORMAL INVITATION THESE OFFERS HAVE NOT BEEN RENEWED. SIMILAR
INVITATIONS HAVE BEEN MADE TO OTHER PREMIERS. IT IS OPEN TO THEM
TO FOLLOW THE LEAD OF THEIR MORE PROGRESSIVE BRETHREN IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA. WE REMAIN PREPARED TO DISCUSS WITH EACH
STATE THE TRANSFER OF ITS RAILWAY SYSTEM TO THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT. SURELY THIS IS ONLY GOOD SENSE GOOD SENSE FOR
THE STATES' FINANCIAL POSITION, AN) GOOD SENSE FOR AUSTRALIA IF
IT LEADS TOWARDS A TRULY NATIONAL RAILWAY SYSTEM.
IT MAY BE SUGGESTED THAT THE ADDITIONAL FUND) S NOW
OFFERED WILL DO TOO LITTLE TO DEAL SPECIFICALLY WITH THE MAIN
FACTOR CAUSING THE STATES' BUD3GETARY PROBLEMS NAMELY INFLATION.
IN CONSIDERING SUCH A VIEW, HOWEVER, IT HAS TO BE BORNE IN MIND
THAT, PARTICULARLY TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE STATES' PAY-ROLL TAX
REVENUES A HIGH PROPORTION OF THE ADDITIONAL COSTS TO THE STATES
AR[ SING FROM INFLATION IS ALREADY AUTOMATICALLY RECOVERED BY
INCREASED FORMULA GRANTS AN) TAX RECEIPTS. FURTHERMORE, IT SEEMS
IMP3LICIT IN THE APPROACH PUBLICLY TAKEN BY SOME PREMIERS AT LEAST
THAT FOR SOME REASON IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT INCREASES IN PUBLIC
EXPENDITURES ATTRIBUTABLE TO INCREASES IN COST LEVELS SHOULD BE
BORNE BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S BUDGETS RATHER THAN BY THE
STATES'. THAT VIEW APPEARS, IN TURN, TO BE BASED ON A VIEW THAT
INCREASES IN INCOME TAX, UNLIKE INCREASES IN OTHER TAXES, ARE
SOMEHOW PAINLESS! IT IS SURELY NOW OBVIOUS TO US ALL THAT SUCH
A VIEW IS MISTAKEN. 0/ 17 
17.
THERE IS AN OUTDATED ATTITUDE THAT INCOME TAXES ARE LESS
INFLATIONARY THAN INDIRECT TAXES. WAGE EARNERS ARE CONSCIOUS
OF HIGH MARGINAL INCOME TAX RATES, WAGE CLAIMS ARE MADE ACCORDINGLY.
FURTHER, THE MATHEWS COMMITTEE'S THESIS ON THE NEED TO INDEX INCOME
TAX AND THE ASPREY COMMITTEE'S VIEWS ON THE SHIFT[ NG OF INCIDENCE
TO INDIRECT TAXES ARE BOTH OPPOSED TO THIS OUTDATED ATTITUDE.
THE VERY REAL BENEFITS WHICH WOULD ACCRUE TO THE STATES
UNDER THE PROPOSALS I HAVE MADE SHOULD NOT BE OBSCURED OR LOST
SIGHT OF IN THE COMPLEX OF MATTERS WHICH MIGHT BE RAISED TODAY.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROPOSES THAT IF THE NEW SET OF
ARRANGEMENTS TO COMMENCE IN 1975-76 IS TO BE FOR FIVE YEARS, IT
OUGHT TO BE REVIEWED BEFORE THE END OF 1979-80. WE WOULD PROPOSE,
ALSO AGAIN FOLLOWING PAST PRACTICE, THAT THE ARRANGEMENTS WOULD BE
SUBJECT TO REVISION BEFORE THEN IF THERE OCCURRED SUBSTANTIAL
CHANGES IN AUSTRALIAN/ STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIPS, OR IN MAJOR
FACTORS AFFECTING THOSE RELATIONSHIPS. IN PARTICULAR, THE
ARRANGEMENTS WILL BE SUBJECT TO THE STATES CONTINUING TO
REFRAIN FROM LEVYING TAXES ON INCOME,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S PROPOSALS ARE MADE ON THE
CLEAR UNDERSTANDING THAT SUBSEQUENT REQUESTS BY THE STATES FOR
ASSISTANCE SUPPLEMENTARY TO THAT YIELDED BY THE FORMULA WILL NOT
BE ENTERTAINED EXCEPT IN CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE TRULY ABNORMAL
AND UNPREDICTABLE, AND WITH WHICH THE STATES ARE CLEARLY UNABLE
TO COPE UNAIDED. 
THATIN TOTAL, IS OUR PROPOSAL ON REVENUE GRANTS FOR THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS. IT CLEARLY OFFERS CONSIDERABLE BENEFITS TO THE
STATES AND WE WOULD EXPECT IT TO BE ACCEPTED BY THE STATES. THE
ALTERNATIVE TO A NEW SET OF ARRANGEMENTS IS THOSE WHICH WOULD
CONTINUE UNDER EXISTING LEGISLATION AND THE STATES ARE, OF COURSE,
FREE TO CHOOSE THAT ALTERNATIVE.
I NOW TURN BRIEFLY TO THE MATTER OF GENERAL PURPOSE
CAPITAL FUNDS FOR THE STATES AND THEIR AUTHORITIES IN 1975-76.
IN A FORMAL SENSE, THESE ARE DECISIONS TO BE TAKEN IN AND BY THE
LOAN COUNCIL. BUT THESE FUNDS ARE, OF COURSE, A MOST IMPORTANT
ELEMENT IN THE STATES' FINANCES AND WE BELIEVE THAT IT IS
APPROPRIATE THAT THE STATES BE INFORMED RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING
OF THIS MEETING OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT; S PROPOSALS IN
AGGREGATE. AGAIN, OUR PROPOSALS ARE SET OUT IN DETAIL IN THE
DOCUMENT TO BE CIRCULATED.
IN BRIEF AND ABSTRACTING FROM SPECIAL FACTORS WE HAVE
IN MIND INCREASES IN THE LOAN COUNCIL PROGRAMS OF BOTH THE STATE
GOVERNMENTS AND THEIR " LARGER" AUTHORITIES OF JUST OVER
17 PER CENT. WE PROPOSE THAT, FOLLOWING THE PRACTICE OF SOME
YEARS NOW NO OVERALL LIMIT BE SET ON BORROWINGS BY SMALLER
AUTHORITIES. WE ALSO PROPOSE THAT, AS A MEASURE OF ASSISTANCE
TO SUCH AUTHORITIES, THE BORROWING LIMIT FOR INDIVIDUAL
AUTHORITIES BEFORE THEY HAVE TO BE INCLUDED IN THE " LARGER"
CATEGORY BE INCREASED FROM $ 500,000 TO $ 600,000. / 19 
19.
WHILE SPEAKING OF THE CAPITAL FUNDS TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE TO THE STATES IN 1975-76 I MIGHT MENTION THE MATTER
OF ADVANCES TO THE STATES FOR WELFARE HOUSING IN THAT YEAR. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S DECISION ON THIS MATTER WILL BE MADE IN THE
BUDGET CONTEXT ANID THE STATES WILL THEN BE INFORMED. THE STATES
CAN, HOWEVER, COUNT ON GETTING NOT LESS THAN THE 1974-75 AMOUNTS.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT I SHOULD NOT PASS FROM THIS DISCUSSION OF REVENUE
ASSISTANCE WITHOUT ACKNOWLEDGING THE FINANCIAL PROBLEMS FACING
LOCAL GOVERNMENT. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN SIGNIFICANT STEPS
TO MAKE LOCAL GOVERNMENT A MORE EFFECTIVE MEMBER OF THE FEDERAL
SYSTEM. THE ROLE OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION HAS BEEN WIDENED TO
INCLUDE LOCAL GOVERNMENT. IN 1974-75 THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
MADE UNTIED GRANTS OF SOME $ 56 MILLION TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BODIES. OTHER ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN GIVEN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
THROUGH THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM, THE NATIONAL ESTATE,
THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM AND THROUGH OTHER PROGRAMS IN
SUCH FIELDS AS TOURISM AND RECREATION, TRANSPORT, EDUCATION,
AND SOCIAL WELFARE. ABOUT THREE QUARTERS OF THE FUNDS
ALLOCATED UNDER THE REDS PROGRAM HAS GONE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
THE CONDITIONS OF FINANCIAL STRINGENCY THAT ITE FACE
TODAY ALLOW LITTLE ROOM FOR FURTHER INCREASE IN THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT'S ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT. CERTAINLY, THERE 
COULD BE NO MOVE FROM RELIANCE BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON LOCAL RATES
AS A PRIME SOURCE OF REVENUE AND AS A REGULATOR OF DEMAND FORSERVICES
CONCLUSION THE PLACE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF COURSE IS IMPORTANT
TO OUR CONCEPTS OF REGIONALISM AND CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING.
WE SEE REGIONALISM AND CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING, TOGETHER,
RATIONALISING THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN
AND STATE GOVERNMENTS. THEY WOULD OVERCOME MANY OF THE CONCERNS
THAT YOUR OFFICIALS HAVE EXPRESSED ABOUT CONDITIONS ATTACHING
TO SPECIFIC PURPOSE PAYMENTS. THEY WOULD DECENTRALISE DECISIONMAKING
TO THE APPROPRIATE LEVEL.
S THE POSITION MY GOVERNM'ENT HAS ADOPTED IS NEITHER NOVEL
NOR UJNIQUE. PROFESSOR RUSSELL MATHEWS, THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRE
FOR RESEARCH ON FEDERAL FINANCIAL RELATIONS IN HIS 1974 REPORT
POINTED TO THE NEED FOR AUSTRALIAN AND STATE GOVERNMENTS TO RECOGNISE
THEIR INTERDEPENDENCE AND TO DEVISE EFFECTIVE MEANS OF CO-ORDINATING
THEIR DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES.
WE SHOULD SEEK, FOR THE LONGER TERM, ARRANGEMENTS THAT WILL
COPE WITH CHANGING CIRCUMSTANCES AND CHANGING PRIORITIES AND WILL
ENABLE THE ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES RAISED FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
TAX-PAYER TO BE MADE ON THE BASIS OF THE NEEDS AND PRIORITIES OF
ALL AUSTRALIANS. 



NOTES ITALIAN CLUB s S:
1. Delighted to be here at the Italian Australian Club in
Launceston one of the only Italian Clubs in Australia that.
I haven't visited before.
Only two weeks aco I was at the Apia Club in Sydney
where I always feel at home with President Jim Bayutti, a great
Italian Australian who has done so much for his new country by
continuing to care for his homeland. I mention in passing that
he is on the board of Qantas and is the head of the new ethnic
radio station in Sydney, which is serving the multi-linual
as well as multi-cultural needs of our migrant communities. He
holds these positions. because of his ability and because he
represents the contribution being made by the 25 per cent of
our Australian population who were born in another country
2. But of course here in Tasmania, there is the remarkable
contribution d-? e by Claude Alcorso not only a most successful
textile entrep-zer r, but also a patron of the arts and of
education n : be hoard of the Australian Opera, and last
year appointed to -he Universities Commission.
3. Then there's Sergio Guidicci from Tasmania who ten years
ago was the first migrant from this State and quite possibly
the first from the whole of Australia to win the celebrated
Rhodes Scholarship which had always been regarded as a fairly
Anglo Saxon institution.
4. But your know as well as I that these figureheads are only
the tip of the iceberg that there are Italian Australians,
Australian Italians throughout Australia who have done wonders
for this country, for this State, people who have made excellent
citizens, people who have brought up families in the best blend / 2 
-2-
of Old tradi-bions and loyalties with. new challen,-es and
opportunities.* My Grovernment understands your asipirations fandI applauds
your initiatives. Clubs like -this ane are living examples
of the interdependence of our cultures. ' Whether they are called
Italian Australian or Australian Itlian no longer matters,
although I realise that ther was a time -and not so many
years ag-o w1-en it was considteredl more respectable, safer by
far -to includle Australian somewhere in the title.'. I would 1 lke
to think that vhere it does now appear in relation to ethnic
cl. ubs it is out of a feeling of affection and not of fear.
6. For my part, I feel a great love of Italy, her culture and
her people. Thctl is shared by my wife lNargaret who is in
Mexico at presen-t, in the Auqstralian delegation to a United
Nations Confergenc e on vomen for International W-omen's Year.
Also in is an Italian Australian women from
Melboure, ? zos vlho is on the National Advisory Committee
for Internation_, * 7ozen's Year in Australia. I know my wife
will feel more ' zna tinoe of re(~ ret at missingt out on my visit
here. Cathy * auahter will be able to tell her all about it
on her return. You kno%!, its always struck me that politicians wiv es
and daughters are quite properly choosey about what activities
they will get involved in, and I don't blame them. Bunt there's
never a. n excuse produced when I mention there's a visit to an
Italian Club coming up. 1/ 3 
3-
7. Talking of excuses, I am reminded of criticism of my visit
to Europe last January. You will recall Liberal and Country
Party criticism of the fact that the Prime Minister of Australia
actually dared to take any time to visit those countries in
Europe that have given us more than a quarter of our entire
population. When I went to Italy for a very brief period,
unfortunately it was the first visit by an Australian Prime
Minister for over 15 years; 15 years during which thousands of
Italians had chosen to take the ' great gamble on building a new
life for themselves in a new Terra Australis. How wrong it
would have been, had I not visited your homeland to gain some
further insight into your birthplace. How wrong I would have
been to let such ill-considered, even prejudiced criticism,
cloud my judgment in that issue.
8. Of course it is proper, of course it is desirable, of course
it matters that the Prime Minister of this country should visit
those European =-untries who have given us so much for so long
their sons aan Their daughters, their labours and fortunately,
their loves.
9. And that brings me to the fact that my Government the
Australian Labor Government cares about what happens to
migrants when they come here, and doesn't just see people like
yourselves as another proposition in the workforce.
Ve realise the communications problems experienced by
newcomers; we recognise how lonely many migrant women feel;
we are aware that many migrants have been exploited because
of language problems in their work situations. We know that
while many migrant children are rightly described as " excellent
achievers", and are highly motivated to do well as school, / 4 
because they ar so encouraged by their parents, others are
not so fortunate, and do iieed special attention.
11 This is one of the thnsI have been talking about
to John Macrostie about while I have been down he71e You kniow
he's a teacher himself, and by all accounts a vezy skiilled,
and imaginativ,; e one. He, li'ke Lance Barnard before him, wouldI
be able to help you with any difficulties your children mignht
experience Zat school. He has worked as a fitter and turner too,
and know,, s what its like to work in a factory, and as a skilled
tradesman he woulId listen -to any problems or idleas you had about
how to imporove -working situations for migrant men and women.
He has already . zai&amp; l that he will listen to and. represent the
9r~~ S o ee: 777one in this electorate as L.-ance Barnard. ( lid
before him. I you all to vote f" or him on " InAurday. 



I,
NIOTES FOR UOlliEIV'S H1ORNIhG TEA
1. COMMIITTED TO IMPROVING QUALITY OF LIFE FOR EVERYONE,
INCLUDING WOMEN, BUT GIVEN THAT WOMEN HAVE TENDED TO BE
NEGLECTED, NECESSARY TO MAKE SPECIAL EFFORT TO ENSURE AS
MUCH IMPROVEMENT AS POSSIBLE IN AS SHORT AS POSSIBLE TIME.
2a APPOINTED ADVISOR ON WOMEN'S AFFAIRS. WIFE OFTEN
COMMENTS THAT I SHOULD HAVE ONE ON MEN'S AFFAIRS, BUT POINT
IS MEN HAVE BEEN REPRESENTED EN MASSE FOR CENTURIES AND
WOMEN NEED SPECIAL VOICE. BACKING INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
YEAR, NOT BECAUSE A GIMMICK BUT BECAUSE EXCELLENT WAY TO
FOCUS ATTENTION ON BROAD SPECTRUM OF WOMEN S CONCERNS.
3, HAVE PAID MORE rHAN LIPSERVICE TO I. WN, Y. $ 2 MILLION
SET ASIDE. CONFERENCES BEING PLANNED ON WOMEN'S HEALTH,
WOMEN IN GOVERNMENT AND WOMEN AND THE MEDIA PLUS MEXICO
CONFERENCE AND CHOGM WIVES MEETING. MAY NOT LIKE BADGE
BUT WILL HAVE SEEN IT ON STAMPS. MY SECRETARIAL STAFF
AND PRESS OFFICE HAVE LIBERALLY DECORATED WITH " WOMEN
ARE ON THE MOVE", " WOMEN ARE TRANSMOGRIFYING" AND " WOMEN'S
PLACE IS EVERYWHERE" STICKERS$
4. WOMEN'S PLACE IS CERTAINLY ON A NUMBER OF THE COMMISSIONS
AND ADVISORY BODIES MY GOVERNMENT HAS ESTABLISHED
ELIZABETH EVATT, ENID CAMPBELL, HILDA ROLFE, AND WOMEN IN
PUBLIC SERVICE MARIE COLEMAN AND JEAN BATTERSBY. WOMEN IN
THE HOUSE THE LOVELY JOAN CHILD, SENATORS MELZER AND COLEMAN
AS WELL AS LIBERAL SENATORS GUILFOYLE AND MARTIN. TREMENDOUS
CONTRIBUTION, o, . o/ 2 
-2-
STILL GREAT CHALLENGE TO MAKE THE MOST OF THE TALENTS
AVAILABLE. COMIMITTEE ON JOB DISCRIMINATION, FOR A START.
HOW TO BRING ABOUT EQUAL PAY W ITHOUT PUTTING WOMEN OUT OF
WORK. HOW TO MODERNISE WITHOUT MAKING PREVIOUSLY ESSENTIAL
PROCESS WORKERS REDUNDANT? AWARE OF THE PROBLEM: ITS WHY SO
MANY WAOMEN ANXIOUS TO GET A [ JEAT GRANT, WOMEN BEING
EMPLOYED ON SOME OF THE RED GRANTS AND QUITE PROPERLY.
THEN THERE ARE ALL THE VOLUNTARY WORKERS AND VOLUNTARY
ENTHUSIASTS WHO MAY NOT CHOOSE TO GO OUT TO WORK BUT ARE
NEVERTHELESS INVOLVED IN VITAL COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES DESIGNED
TO PROVIDE CARE FOR THOSE WHO NEED IT WHETHER THE OLD,
THE VERY YOUNG, THE HANDICAPPED, YOUNG PEOPLE WITH PROBLEMS1f
FAMILIES WqITH PROBLIEMS THE VERY GROUPS UNABLE TO SPEAK
FOR THEMSEL/ ES AND ABOUT WHOM my GOVERNMENT CARES, AND MY
GOVERNMENT Z3REALISES THAT IT IS IMPORTANT TO KEEP
VOLUNTARY ' ND ZHARITA3LE ORGANISATIONS INVOLVED IN THIS KIND
OF WORK B; UT ALSO TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WITHOUT
CONTROL SO Th. A-i THE WORK CAN GO ON MORE EFFICIENTLY BUT WITHOUT
LOSING THAT FERSONAL CONTACT WHICH IS VITAL.
7. JUST THIS WEEK I VISITED THE Low HEAD GERIATRIC HOSPITAL
AND SAW AT FIRST HAND THE EXCELLENCE OF THE ATTENTION GIVEN
TO THESE OLD PEOPLE. IN THE LAST FEW MONTHS I HAVE OPENED
THREE OLD PEOPLES HOMES BUILT SINCE my GOVERNMENT INCREASED
SUBSIDY PAYABLE TO ORGANISATIONS TO $ 4j FOR $ 1I FROM $ 2 FOR $ 1,
TASMANIA HAS RECEIVED NEARLY $ 3 MILLION FOR SUCH ACCOMMODATION.
WE REALISE THE NEED TO HOUSE OLD PEOPLE WITH AS MUCH
INDIVIDUAL INDEPENDENCE AND COMFORT AS NECESSARY AND WE
HAVE DONE SOMETHING ABOUT IT. 
-3-
8. THEN AT THE OTHER END OF THE SCALE THERE IS THE WHOLE
RANGEOF CHLDHOOD SERVICES WHICH BENEFIT BT OHR N
CHILDREN, i( ifi BEAZLEY POINTED OUT THAT 5,000 KINDERGARTEN
PLACES ARE BEING PROVIDED IN TASMANIA NOT BY THE SCHOOLS
COMMISSIONJ BUT BY THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. AND I WANT
TO KNOCK THE RUMOUR THAT IT FORESHADOWS A FEDERAL TAKEOVER
OF PRESCHOOL EDUCATION. IT MEANS PURELY AND SIMPLY THAT
MORE PLACES ARE AVAILABLE FOR KINDERGARTEN AGE CHILDREN.
UNDER VARIOUS ACTS. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
PROVIDED 4) 298,000 FOR THE CITY OF LAUNCESTON TO PURCHASE LAND
ANID CONSTRUCT A CHILD CARE CENTRE FOR 55 CHILDREN FROM
YEARS, AND THE QUEEN VICTORIA HOSPITAL CRECHE HAS
RECEIVED A $ 21,718 FOR STAFF SUBSIDY AND $ 6,127 ON A NEEDS
BASIS. AT LILYDALE, A SINGLE UNIT PRESCHOOL WILL RECEIVE
A $ 47,850 GRANT, AND ANOTHER AT YOUNGTOWN WILL GET $ 48,950,
RAVENSWOOD PRIMARY WILL GET $ 111,000 FOR A DOUBLE UNIT
PRESCHOOL. AN ADDITIONAL $ 119,000 GOES TO SUMMERDALE FOR
SIMILAR UNITS. THEN THE TASMANIAN CHILD CARE ORGANISATION
IS TO GET $ 10, 500 FOR THE FIRST YEAR'S OPERATION FOR
LAUNCESTON FAMILY DAY CARE, PLUS A $ 13,000 RECURRENT
PER CAPITA GRANT AND $ 1,700 FOR EQUIPMENT.
AFTER THE PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON YESTERDAY, TWO WOMEN MADE
A POINT OF THANKING ME FOR WHAT my GOVERNMENT HAS DONE FOR
HANDICAPPED AND RETARDED CHILDREN. BUT OF COURSE WE DON' T GET
MUCH PUBLICITY FOR THE PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO HELP IN THESE
AREAS. k AS LONG AS PEOPLE LIKE YOURSELVES REALISE, THAT IS
WHAT MATTERS MOST, BECAUSE YOU CARE MOST. 
-4-
IN 1973/ 74 WE MADE $ 179,368 AVAILABLE TO
TASMANIA FOR SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT. THAT FIGURE ROSE LAST
YEAR ON THE BASIS OF A $ 4 FOR $ 1 SUBSIDY FOR CAPITAL COSTS
AND $ 1 FOR $ 1 FOR ELIGIBLE STAFF SERVICES TO NON-PROFIT
ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES,
SIMILAR GRANTS COME UNDER ASSISTANCE FOR
HANDICAPPED PERSONS INCLUDING A $ 4 FOR $ 1 RENTAL SUBSIDY
TO ORGANISATIONS PROVIDING CENTRES, EQUIPMENT AND
RESIDENTIAL HOLIDAY ACCOMMODATION FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN
AND ADULTS, 



SUGGESTED LINE FOR LAUNCESTON flATRICULATION COLLEGE
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION INTRODUCED A VERY ORIGINAL
NOTE INTO THE CAMPAIGN WHEN HE SPOKE TO THE TASMANIAN
PRESS CLUB HERE IN LAUNCESTON ON TUESDAY. HE RAISED
THE ISSUE OF CIVIL LIBERTIES AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.
NOW THIS IS A VERY IMPORTANT ISSUE. IT IS AN ISSUE
THAT WILL BE CENTRAL TO THE POLITICAL DEBATE IN
AUSTRALIA AND THROUGHOUT THE WORLD FOR THE REST
OF YOUR LIVES, THE NOVEL THING ON TUESDAY WAS THAT
IT SHOULD BE RAISED BY MR FRASER IN THE WAY HE DID
IN THE FORM OF AN ATTACK UPON THE LABOR GOVERNMENT.
YOU ARE EO:_' G TO HEAR A GREAT DEAL ALONG THIS LINE
BEFORE Th-E I-EXT GENERAL ELECTION WHEN MOST OF YOU
WILL BE A-B31-TO EXERCISE THE MOST BASIC OF ALL
DEMOCRATIC R: GHTS THE RIGHT TO VOTE.
THAT RIGHT TO VOTE AT 18 W'J WAS GIVEN BY THE VERY
FIRST PIECE. OF LEGISLATION INTRODUCED IN THE FIRST
SESSION OF PARLIAMENT AFTER WE FIRST BECAME THE GOVERNMENT.
ANY OF YOU WHO ARE VOTING ON SATURDAY HAVE THAT RIGHT
BECAUSE A LABOR GOVERNMENT GAVE IT TO YOU AFTER 23 YEARS
OF REFUSAL TO ALLOW IT BY THE LIBERALS., NDIVIDUAL
RIGHTS AND HUMAN FREEDOMS ARE THE MOST PRECIOUS THINGS
WE HAVE. 
-2-
BUT WOULDN'T YOU SAY. THAT PERHAPS THE MOST SACRED
OF THEM ALL, WOULDN T YOU PUT AT THE TOP OF THE LIST
YOUR RIGHT NOT TO BE DRAFTED INTO MILITARY SERVICE
THAT IS, YOUR RIGHT OVER THE USE OF YOUR OWN BODY?
MR FRASER WAS MINISTER FOR THE ARMY AND THEN MINISTER
FOR DEFENCE UNTIL HE FELL OUT WITH JOHN GORTON AND
DESTROYED HIM IN A GOVERNMENT WHICH INTRODUCED THE
FIRST PEACE TIME CONSCRIPTION IN AUSTRALIA'S
HISTORY, IF l'\ R FRASER WAS SrILL IN GOVERNMENT,
EVERY BOY IN THIS ROOM WOULD BE LIABLE FOR TWO YEARS
COMPULSORY MILITARY SERVICE. IT IS ALL TOO EASILY
FORGOTTEN, IT IS ALL TOO EASILY FORGOTTEN THAT
MORE THAN HALF OF THOSE WHO WERE KILLED IN VIETNAM
THE FORGOTTEN FIVE HUNDRED WERE CONSCRIPTS AND
THAT TWO-THIRDS OF THOSE WHO SERVED IN VIETNAM
THE FORGOTTEN , qAR WERE CONSCRIPTS. z
FOR ALL BUT 18 MONTHS OF OUR WRETCHED INVOLVEMENT IN
THAT WRETCHED WAR, MR FRASER PRESIDED AS ARMY MINISTER
AND DEFENCE MINISTER OVER THE CONSCRIPT SYSTEM,
THE FIRST ACTION LANCE BARNARD TOOK AS A MINISTER ON
THE DAY HE AND I FORMED THE GOVERNMENT WAS TO END
CONSCRIPTION, WE DIDN'T WAIT FOR THE PARLIAMENT TO
MEET, IT WAS DONE BY THE STROKE OF A PEN. 
7
ON THE SAME DAY WE ENDED THE LAST VESTIGES OF
AUSTRALIA' S MILITARY COM" MITMENT IN INDO-CHINA AND
WE FREED FROM PRISON ANY HEN WHO WERE SERVING TERMS
FOR REFUSING MILITARY SERVICEoWE WIPED FROM THE
RECORDS THEIR CONVICTIONS SO THAT THEY WOULD NOT
SPEND A LIFETIME OF CIVIL HANDICAP BECAUSE OF THEIR
CONVICTION THEIR CONVICTION IN BOTH SENSES OF THE WORDCONVICTION
AS CRIMINALS FOR STANDING UP FOR THEIR
CONVICTIONS. DON'T FORGET VIETNAM -IT WAS A WAR THE LIBERALS
FOISTED UPON AUSTRALIA AND AS THE RECORD OF HOW WE
GOT INVOLVED, WHICH I AS AN INDEPENDENT HISTORIAN
COMPILED AND PUBLISHED A FORTNIGHT AGO SHOWSA
WAR WE GOT INTO THROUGH LIBERAL LIES AND LIBERAL
DECEIT AND LIBERAL STUPIDITY. DON'T FORGET
CONSCRIPTION OR WHAT IT MEANS TO YOUR CIVIL
LIBERTIES, ESPECIALLY WHEN ONE OF ITS GREATEST
ADVOCATES, rFIR FRASER, TALKS ABOUT FREEDOM.
LET ME MENTION SOME OTHER BASIC RIGHTS. IS THERE
ANYTHING MORE FUNDAMENTAL THAN EQUALITY BEFORE THE
LAW? THERE CAN.'. BE NO EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW
UNLESS THERE IS EQUALITY OF ACCESS TO THE COURTS.
WITHOUT THAT EQUALITY THERE WILL ALWAYS BE ONE LAW
FOR THE RICH AND ANOTHER FOR THE POOR. WE HAVE
SET UP THE LEGAL AID SERVICE TO PROVIDE THAT EQUALITY. 
THERE IS THE BASIC QUESTION OF RIGHTS FPR ABORIGINES.
T. SMART ALECKa-4v. HAD c. E;
, Oi4t R JOKE AT TASMANIAN EXPENSE BY CHI-ACKING
THE VISIT HERE DURING THE CAMPAIGN BY MY MINISTER
FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS, LES JOHNSON, T THOUGHT
THAT THERE WERE NO ABORIGINES IN TASMANIA BECAUSE
OF THE DREADFUL THINGS WE DID OVER A HUNDRED YEARS AGO.
IN FACT THERE ARE IMPORTANT PROGRAMS OPERATING IN
THIS AREA FOR ABORIGINES. BUT THE POINT I WANT
TO MAKE IS, FOR THE FIRST TIME IN OUR HISTORY,
AUSTRALIA HAS A GOVERNMENT WHICH IS TRYING TO RESTORE
BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS TO ABORIGINES AND TO REPAIR
AUSTRALIA'S REPUTATION,
ANOTHER -AS: C HUMAN RIGHT IS POLITICAL AND NATIONAL
INDEPENDEiCE,. ON 16 SEPTEMBER WE SHALL BE GIVING
INDEPENDENCE TO MORE THAN TWO MILLION HUMAN BEINGS,
THE TWO A: D A HALF MILLION PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN THE
WORLD'S LARGEST REMAINING COLONY, PAPUA NEW GUINEA.
FOR MOST OF THE YEARS THE LIBERALS WERE IN POWER,
UNTIL 1971 AT THE EARLIEST, THE MINISTER FOR WHAT
WAS THEN CALLED EXTERNAL TERRITORIES USED TO TALK ABOUT
INDEPENDENCE FOR PAPUA NEW GUINEA IN TERMS OF THE
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY IF THEN, TALK ABOUT ALL
POWER BEING VESTED IN CANBERRA' 
IT WILL BE ONE OF THE PROUDEST THINGS OF MY LIFE
TO HAVE ACHIEVED WHAT A MERE 5 YEARS AGO WAS DENOUNCED
AS WILDLY IRRESPONSIBLE TO DIVEST CANBERRA OF
AUTHORITY OVER THE LIVES OF TWO AND A HALF
MILLION PEOPLE.
IN THE MATTER OF MOST IMMEDIATE CONCERN TO YOU
AT THE MOMENT YOUR OWN EDUCATION, IS THERE ANY
RIGHT MORE IMPORTANT THAN EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
FOR A DECENT EDUCATION? WHEN HE WASN'T MINISTER
FOR ARMY PRESIDING OVER CONSCRIPTION OR MINISTER
FOR DEFENCE PRESIDING OVER THE WAR IN VIETNAM,
MR FRASER WAS MINISTER FOR EDUCATION,
HE WAS V~_ FIN HIS OPPOSITION TO THE NEEDS CONCEPT
IN EDUCAT:,.., HICH HAS BEEN PUT INTO EFFECT BY THE
SCHOOLS CM SOI HE WAS OPPOSED TO THE SCHOOLS
COMMISSION LTSELF, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WHICH HAS
TRANSFORMED -=--UCATION IN OUR NATION, HE WAS OPPOSED
TO FREE EDUCATION AT UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF
ADVANCED EDUCATION. THESE ARE THINGS WE HAVE
ESTABLISHED, THINGS WHICH HAVE GUARANTEED TO EVERY
AUSTRALIAN 30Y AND GIRL, A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT OF
EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY. 
-6-
THIS IS INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR. ONI E OF THE
GREAT RIGHTS THAT WOMEN AROUND THE WORLD HAVE
BEEN FIGHTING FOR FOR GENERATIONS IS EQUAL PAY
FOR EQUAL WORK. ALMOST ALONE OF THE ADVANCED
WEALTHY COUNTRIES. AUSTRALIA UNDER THs LIBERALS/
REFUSED THIS RIGHT TO WOMEN. WE ESTABLISHED THAT
RIGHT.
YOU HAV! E TO JUDGE WHETHER THAT IS A RIGHT WORTH
HAVING, BECAUSE IT DOES BRING WITH IT SOME DIFFICULTIES,
YOU HAVE BEEN HEARING A GREAT DEAL ABOUT THE DAMAGE
OUR TARIFF CUT OF 25% DID TO THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY
HERE IN LAUNCESTON, THE FACT IS THAT THE REAL REASON
WHY THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY DEVELOPED IN PLACES LIKE
LAUNCESTON WAS THAT THEY WERE ABLE TO CALL UPON GROUPS
OF UNSKILLED'WOMEN WORKERS WHO. WOULD ACCEPT LOW WAGES
BECAUSE THERE WAS NO OTHER FORM OF EMPLOYMENT AVAILABLE.
ONCE THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL PAY WAS ESTABLISHED BY
my GOVERNMENT THIS NO LONGER APPLIED. THE TARIFF
CUTS HAVE BEEN A MARGINAL FACTOR IN FORCING THE
vyfp
RESTRUCTING OF THE AUSTRALIAN TEXTILE INDUSTRY.
THE TRUTH IS THAT IF ONE TRIED TO RESTORE THE AUSTRALIAN
TEXTILE INDUSTRY TO ITS EARLIER SITUATION, ONE WOULD HAVE
TO TAKE AWAY EQUAL PAY NOT JUST IN TEXTILE BUT IN
ALL INDUSTRY, FOR ALL WOMEN. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E, G. WHITLAM, Q. C, M. P.
AT THE OPENING OF THE MEETING OF THE CAPITAL CITY LORD MAYORS,
27 JUNE 1975, AT THE TOWN HALL, CITY OF SYDNEY
My LORD MAYORS,
WE LAST MET 18 MONTHS AGO IN CANBERRA. WE MEET
AGAIN TODAY IN THE TOWN HALL OF THE CITY WHICH GREW
FROM THE FIRST EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA, 187
YEARS AGO. IN 1842 IT BECAME THE FIRST MUNICIPALITY
IN NEW SOUTH WALES. IT IS INDEED AN APPROPRIATE VENUE
FOR A MEETING BETWEEN THE HEADS OF AUSTRALIA'S CENTRAL
CITIES AND ITS NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
TODAY, WE WILL BE DISCUSSING IDEAS OF MUTUAL
CONCERN. WE WILL BE IDENTIFYING AREAS WHERE OUR
OFFICERS CAN HAVE FURTHER DISCUSSIONS. THERE HAVE
ALREADY BEEN REGULAR MEETINGS BETWEEN OFFICIALS
OF THE CAPITAL CITIES SECRETARIAT AND THE DEPARTMENT
OF URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND IT IS MY
HOPE THAT THESE COOPERATIVE EFFORTS CAN BE FURTHER
EXTENDED. 
-2
THE CAPITAL CjTIES
YOU HAVE NOT COME TOGETHER TODAY TO REPRESENT
LOCAL GOVERNNENT GENERALLY, WLE SEEK DISCUSSIONS Oil
MATTERS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN TO THE CAPITAL CITIES.
YOU ARE SEP-KING RECOGNITION FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT OF THE SPECIAL PROBLEMS WHICH THE CAPITAL
CITIES SUFFER AND THE NEED FOR SPECIAL MEASURES TO
SOLVE THOSE PROBLEMS.
WITH THE OBVIOUS EXCEPTION OF BRISBANE, THE
FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY THE CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS
DIFFER FROM' THOSE SUBURBAN AUTHORITIES IN EACH
METROPOLIS IN SCALE AND LOCATION, RATHER THAN
FUNCTION. AT THE SAME TIME, WE ALL ACCEPT THAT IT
IS DIFFICULT TO GENERALISE ACROSS THE RANGE OF CAPITAL
CITIES AS THEY EACH DIFFER TO SOME DEGREE.
11E ACKNOWLEDGE THAT CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS DO
UNDERTAKE HIGHER LEVELS OF SPENDING DUE PARTLY TO
THE HIGHER COSTS IN PROVIDING SERVICES IN CENTRAL
CITY LOCATIONS. HIGHER STANDARDS OF SERVICES ARE
OFTEN DEMANDED AND THERE ARE, SPECIAL SERVICES WHICH
ARE NOT WHOLLY USED BY RATEPAYERS. / 3 
3
GENERALLY, YOU HAVE A DISPROPORTIONATE AMOUNT OF
PROPERTY EXEMPT FROM RATING AND THIS INCLUDES PROPERTY
OWNED BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT. YOU HAVE EXTENSIVE
PARKLANDS AND CULTURAL FACILITIES WHICH ARE USED BY
THE PEOPLE OF THE WHOLE METROPOLIS.
ON THE OTHER HAND THESE SPECIAL PROBLEMS ARE
NOT UNIQUE TO CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS. SEASIDE COUNCILS
ARE REQUIRED TO COPE WITH THE INFLUX OF VISITORS
USING THEIR BEACHES AND RECREATION FACILITIES, SOME
SUBURBAN OR COUNTRY TOWN COUNCILS HAVE VERY LARGE
AREAS OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY OR OTHER NON RATEABLE
PROPERTY WdHICH CAN SUBSTANTIALLY REDUCE THEIR
INCOME PROSPECTS. IN CERTAIN OF THE SMALLER CAPITAL.
CITIES THE ROBLEMS WHICH ARE FACED ARE NOT THAT
DIFFERENT FROM THE PROBLEMS OF CITIES SUCH AS
NEWCASTLE AND WOLLONGONG.
MDDITIONALLY; MUCH OF THE EXPENDITURE OF THE
CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS IS DEVOTED TO WORKS AND
SERVICES WHICH ENSURE THE CONTINUED VIABILITY OF
THE CITY AS A COMMERCIAL CENTRE OF THE METROPOLIS, m / I4 
THIS IS REFLECTED IN THE HIGH LEVEL OF RATEABLE
VALUES WHICH IN TURN RESULT IN ABOVE AVERAGE REVENUE
RAISING CAPACITIES WITH WHICH TO FINANCE THOSE
ACTIVITIES, IT IS IMPORTANT FOR US ALL TO RECOGNISE AT
THE OUTSET THAT THESE DIFFICULTIES AND PROBLEMS
COULD BE ALLEVIATED BY MEANS OTHER THAN GRANTS
FROM HIGHER LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT. INSTITUTIONAL
REARRANGEMENTS SHOULD BE EXAMINED. THE ADEQUACY
OF THE PRESENT STRUCTURE OF METROPOLITAN LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND SCHEMES FOR COST SHARING BETWEEN
THE CAPITAL CITIES AND OTHER AUTHORITIES IN THE
METROPOLITAN AREA ARE TWO POSSIBLE AREAS WORTHY
OF CONSiKDATION.
AuSTRALIAm GRANTS CoMISSION
I RECOGNISE THAT THE ROLE OF THE GRANTS
COMMISSION IS OF CONCERN TO YOU. I SHOULD EMPHASISE
AT THE OUTSET THAT THE COMMISSION IS AN INDEPENDENT
BODY HEADED BY A VERY INDEPENDENTLY MINDED CHAIRMAN. 11 
DECISIONS ON METHODOLOGY REST W JH THE COMMISSION
AND I, FOR ONE, CANNOT 4T4= ATE ITS
REPORT FOR 1975-76,
IN-ITS 1974 REPORT ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, THE GRANTS COMMISSION
RECOMMENDED THE ALLOCATION OF $ 56,4M DURING THE
FOLLOWING FINANCIAL YEAR FOR GENERAL REVENUE FISCAL
EQUALISATION GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES, I
SHOULD STRESS THE WORD " EQUALISATION". WE CONSIDER
THAT THOSE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES WITH THE GREATEST
PROBLEMS AND LEAST MEANS OF HELPING THEMSELVES SHOULD
RECEIVE THE MOST ASSISTANCE, THIS IS REFLECTED IN THE
CHARTER OF THE GRANTS COMMISSION. C-T
HAVE SAID, THAT I CANNOT AaT.'-IP* TE WHAT
RECOMMENDATIONS THE COMMISSION WILL MAKE ON THE
QUESTION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE CAPITAL
CITIES. I RECOGNISE THAT LAST YEAR THE COMMISSION
RECOMMENDED A $ 2M GRANT TO THEBRISBANE CITY
COUNCIL IN RECOGNITION OF THE SPECIAL SITUATION OF
BRISBANE COMPARED TO THE OTHER CAPITAL CITY COUNCILS, ,/ 6 
-6-
I UNDERSTAND THAT THE COMMISSION HAS HAD THE BENEFIT
OF THE VIEWS OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATIONS WHICH HAS MADE SUBMISSIONS
ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT GENERALLY, I WILL READ
THE SHORTLY TO BE DELIVERED GRANTS COMMISSION REPORT
WITH GREAT INTEREST,
SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS
YOU WILL ALL BE AWARE OF THE SUBSTANTIAL INCREASE
IN THE LEVEL AND RANGE OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS
WHICH HAVE BEEN MADE AVAILABLE TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT, WE ARE NOW INVOLVED
IN A COMPr-. ENSIVE SYSTEM OF GRANTS TO LOCAL BODIES.
IN 1973-74, GRANTS WERE MADE DIRECTLY TO
LOCAL AUTHCRITIES FOR AGED PERSONS HOMES, DELIVERED
MEALS, HOME NURSING, SHELTERED EMPLOYMENT, CHILD
CARE, ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT, AND COMMUNITY ARTS.
ASSISTANCE WAS ALSO GIVEN TO LOCAL AERODROMES
ALTHOUGH THIS CATEGORY IS UNLIKELY TO BE OF GREAT
CONCERN TO YOU TODAY, 
-7
PAYMENTS HAVE ALSO BEEN MADE THROUGH THE STATES
FOR SEWERAGE AND ROADS AND IN CERTAIN AREAS, FOR
URBAN DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY AND FOR AREA IMPROVEMENT.
IN 1974-75 my GOVERNMENT INTRODUCED NEW OR EXPANDED
PROGRAMS FOR CHILD CARE CENTRES, PRE-SCHOOLS,
REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENT, AND ASSISTANCE TO
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONs, THE AUTAINASSISTANCE
PLAN HAS ALSO PROVIDED FUNDS FOR LOCAL PROJECTS.
IT IS NOT PRESENTLY POSSIBLE TO PRECISELY
CALCULATE IN FINANCIAL TERMS THE GROWTH IN SPECIFIC
PURPOSE ASSISTANCE. THE DIFFERENCES IN FUNCTIONS
CARRIED ON BETWEEN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN EACH STATE
OR PARTS 3F STATES AND THE WAY IN WHICH FUNDING OF
PROGRAMS -7 SOMETIMES LINKED WITH STATE FUNDED
PROGRAMS, MAKES THE TASK DIFFICULT. SUFFICE TO
SAY THAT THE LEVEL OF ASSISTANCE HAS BEEN
CONSIDERA3LE, AND WHEN ADDED TO FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE
FROM OTHER SOURCES, WE BELIEVE THAT LOCAL GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN GIVEN SUBSTANTIAL HELP IN PROVIDING BOTH
BASIC LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES AS WELL AS
THOSE MORE-* PERSONAL SERVICES WHICH OUR COMMUNITY
HAS BEEN INCREASINGLY DEMANDING. 
-8-
IT IS OUR AIM TO KEEP UNDER REVIEW THE TERMS
AND CONDITIONS OF SPECIFIC PURPOSE GRANTS, WE NEED
TO GUARD AGAINST OVERLAP AND DEVISE PROCEDURES
WHEREBY THE DETAILED DECISION-MAKING CAN BE DEVOLVED
TO UNITS OF GOVERNMENT CLOSE TO THE PEOPLE.
ON 18 JUNE 1975 1 RELEASED A STATEMENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S POLICY ON REGIONALISM. AMONGST
OTHER THINGS I. SAID THAT A REGIONAL POLICY IS BASED
ON THE CONCEPT THAT SOME PROGRAMS AND SERVICES OF
GOVERNMENT ARE MOST EFFICIENTLY AND EFFECTIVELY
PLANNED, CO-ORDINATED AND DELIVERED AT A LEVEL
INTERMEDIATE TO THAT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AND THAT ThE POLICY IS BASED ON THE CONTINUED EXISTENCE
OF FEDER. L. STATE AND LOCAL STRUCTURES.
AT THE CONFERENCE WITH PREMIERS ON -19 JUNE I
INVITED PREMIERS TO JOIN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE BETTER ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES
WITHIN FUNCTIONS. ,19/ 9 
9-
THE STATE GOVERNMENTS HAVE AGREED TO FURTHER
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN OFFICERS ON THE POSSIBILITIES
OF CO-OPERATIVE PLANNING. I WOULD HOPE THAT
AGREEMENT ON A GENERAL APPROACH CAN BE REACHED IN
THE NEXT FEW MONTHS, OBVIOUSLY FULL IMPLEMENTATION
MAY TAKE SOME YEARS, BUT YOU CAN HAVE MY ASSURANCES
THAT THE PLACE AND ROLE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN
ANY CONSULTATION AND PLANNING ARRANGEMENTS WILL
BE OF PRIME CONCERN TO THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
WE ALSO RECOGNISE THE IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION
ABOUT THE VARIOUS PROGRAMS OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
WHICH ARE A" VAILABLE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
AT OUR 1L' 37S MEETING, YOU MADE COMMENTS ON THIS ISSUE
AND AS A DRECT RESULT THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND
REGIONAL 1E'--'/"= LOPMEN4T PRODUCED A BOOKLET IN MAY 1974.
WHICH GAVE DETAILS OF THE VARIOUS PROGRAMS. THAT
BOOKLET IS NOW BEING REVISED AND SHOULD BE AVAILABLE
SHORTLY. 
11
IT IS TO BE UNDERTAKEN IN LIAISON WITH THE NEW
ZEALAND DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS AND A
COMPREHENSIVE WORK PROGRAM HAS BEEN PREPARED
INVPLVING ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT, IT IS INTENDED
TO PRODUCE A REPORT BY THE END OF OCTOBER
ADVISING GOVERNMENTS ON POSSIBLE MEASURES TO TACKLE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES, AND
FURTHER RESEARCH.
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
I UNDERSTAND THAT MY COLLEAGUE, MR TOM UREN,
THE MINISTER FOR URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, HAS
MADE SCi REMARKS ABOUT THE ROLE OF THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICTS OF AUSTRALIAN CITIES IN THE
CONTEXT CF THE WHOLE CITY. IT IS CERTAINLY MY
EXPERIENCE, FOR ALL HIS TALK ABOUT GENTLENESS,
THAT TOm UREN CAN BE BLUNT WHEN HE IS TALKING
ABOUT SOMETHING WHICH GREATLY CONCERNS HIM.
MY GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS AND POLICIES
CANNOT BE VIEWED IN ISOLATION, ALONG WITH THE
MAJOR DECISIONS WHICH YOU TAKE, THEY SHOULD BE
DEVELOPED WITHIN A STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK IN WHICH
THEY AND OTHER INITIATIVES IN URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA ARE SEEN AS
PART OF A COORDINATED WHOLE. ,/ 12 
12
THE BREADTH OF RESOURCES WHICH NOW HAVE TO
BE CHANNELLED IN THE DIRECTION OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND THE NATIONAL PRIORITY NOW ACCORDED
TO THE PROBLEMS OF CITIES AND REGIONS PUTS A HEAVY
RESPONSIBILITY ON THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO SEE
THAT RESOURCES ARE USED EFFICIENTLY AND ARE
DISTRIBUTED EQUITABLY THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, WITHTHESE
CONCERNS, AS WELL AS ITS POLICIES ON THE
LOCATION OF PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT, THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS A RESPONSIBILITY TO ENSURE THAT ITS
DECISIONS ARE NOT TAKEN IN ISOLATION. IN THE SAME
MANNER, THE CAPITAL CITIES COUNCILS SHOULD RECOGNISE
THAT THE EFFECTS AND ACTIONS OF POLICIES OF ALL
CAPITAL.-CITIES DO HAVE FUNDAMENTAL CONSEQUENCES
FOR S! L-=' CUNDING AREAS OUTSIDE THEIR IMMEDIATE
RESPONS:-31LITIES. 0,' LCTHMIES OPPORTUNITY TO DISCUSS THESE
GENERAL ISSUES WITH You. THIS CONSULTATION AND'
DISCUSSION SHOULD CONTINUE AT OUR LEVEL AS WELL
AS BETWEEN OUR OFFICIALS. IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT
AT SOME FUTURE DATE WE SHOULD INCLUDE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT GENERALLY IN OUR ROUND TABLE DISCUSSIONS. / 113 
13
IAM SURE THAT TODAY'S DISCUSSIONS WILL BE AN
IMPORTANT EVENT IN THE CONTINUED PROGRAM OF
CONSULTATION BETWEEN THE NATIONAL AND LOCAL LEVELS
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA.
Q~, 0ff~ o r
A LsA



J\ USTRAI/ M GoI . N! EiET_ OFFICES
LAST FRIDA':, WITH THE PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH W1ALES AND THE
LORD MfAYOR OF SYDNEY, I SIGNED AN AGREEMENT BY WHICH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE $ 17 MILLION FOR
THE RESIDENTIAL REDEVELOPMENT OF OOLOOHOOLOO.
THERE IS A SIGNIFICANT RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THAT
OCCASION TH1I S. BOTH BRING TO AT LEAST PARTIAL
FRUITION, CNERTAKINGS MADE IN 1972.
THOSE UNDERTAKINGS MEANT A REVERSAL OF EXISTING PLANS
UNDER THE PRE'IOUS GOVERNMENT. IT WAS PROPOSED,
YOU WILL RE'EM3ERI THAT NEW COMMONWEALTH OFFICES WERE
TO BE BUILT " i ' OOLOOPOOLOO A FULL TWO MILES FROM
SYDNEY iHAT WAS HARDLY A MODEL OF
DECENTRALI A' 1. IT TOOK NO ACCOUNT OF THE GROWING
PRESSURE CN r ACILTIES AND SERVICES OF THE
CENTRAL CiTY . EA AND OF ITS TRANSPORT SYSTEM.
IT TOOK NO OOF. :: TH2EN T SPECIAL CHARACTER OF WOOLOOMOOLOO
AS A RESIDE: T: LL AREA. IT TOOK NO ACCOUNT OF THE
CONVENIENCE : 3 AVAILABILITY OF STAFF. IT TOOK NO
ACCOUNT OF T E ' LACE AND PACE OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE
METROPOLIT.. i -AREA OR OF THE NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE IN
THE WESTEP' REGION. 
-2-
So FRIDAY'S OCCASION AND TODAY'S BOTH FULFIL SPECIFIC
UNDERTAKINGS GIVEN BY TOM UREN AND ME IN 1972,
THERE IS MORE TO IT THAN THAT HOWEVER. BOTH
THESE MATTERS REPRESENT A CRUCIAL PART OF OUR WHOLE
. PROGRAM OUR BELIEF THAT THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
MUST BE DIRECTLY INVOLVED IN THE PLACES WHERE MOST
AUSTRALIANS LIVE, IN CITIES AND CENTRES.
IT'S FITTING ENOUGH THAT THIS FIRST PART OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN PARRAMATTA THE
TAXATION CENTRE SHOULD BE OPENED ON THE LAST DAY
OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR AND READY FOR BUSINESS ON THE
FIRST DAY OF THE NE FINANCIAL YEAR, THERE ARE
STAFF C.-F : A" TATION OFFICE ALREADY HERE.
IHIS OFFICE -EESEET3S THE FIRST MAJOR PRACTICAL STEP
TCWARDS IMPLE'_'-TI'CUR POLICY OF DISPERSING THE
? P'BLC SER'/ I-E -T SL-METROPOLITAN AND REGIONAL AREAS,
THIS OFFICE -E= E -' LL BE THE LARGEST BRANCH OF ANY
DEPARTMENT CF ThE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE OUTSIDE
CANBERRA. AS FAR AS THE TAXATION OFFICE ITSELF
IS CONCERNED, THIS MOVE IS THE FORERUNNER OF A PLANNED
DISPERSAL TO CENTRES IN CAMPBELLTOWN, ALBURY-WODONGA, AND
TO DANDENONG AND BROADMEADOWS IN IELBOURNE.
THIS CENTRE ITSELF IS EVENTUALLY PLANNED TO HOUSE
5,000 PUBLIC SERVANTS, 
-3-
ONE VERY I =-CTANT ASPECT OF THIS PROGRAM OF DISPERSAL
IS TO BRE.-. -, WN ANY FALSE BARRIERS BETWEEN THE
PUBLIC SEr,': CE AND THE COMMUNITY WHICH IT SERVES
AND OF WHICH IT IS AN INTEGRAL PART. THERE IS
NOTHING MORE UNREAL, IN SOCIAL TERMS, IN ECONOMIC TERMS,
IN POLITICAL TERMS, THAN TO DRAW DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN
PUBLIC EMPLDYEES AND PRIVATE EMPLOYEES.
IE HAVE A :. 1XED ECONOMY AND EACH SECTOR OF THE ECONOMY
IS INTERDE=_ EN. ENT, THIS BUILDING MAY BE A GOVERNMENT
BUILDING, SUT IT' S COMPLETION DEPENDS UPON SCORES
OF PRIVATE CONTRACTS THE BUILDING ITSELF, THE EQUIPMENT
IN IT, THE SERVICING OF IT AND THE PEOPLE EMPLOYED IN IT.
A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF WHAT IS CALLED ' GOVERNMENT SPENDING'
ENDS UP IN F. AC AS PRIVATE SPENDING.
T-: E DISTINTC-I: ETEEN THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS
IS E. UALLY . L--EAL '-EN IT COMES TO EMPLOYMENT,
FOR EXAMPLE, E 3AN
IN i1EW SOUT--ES, PART OF IT. HOW UNREAL IT IS
TO SUGGEST 7--T OFFICERS. IN THE PRIVATE HEALTH FUNDS,
BECAUSE CL-ASsI-ED AS PRIVATE EMPLOYEES, ARE IN SOME
WAY DIFFER. E:? ;-ORE PRODUCTIVE THAN THEIR COLLEAGUES
IN MEDIBANK. INDEED LARGE NUMBERS OF EMPLOYEES HAVE
TRANSFERRED= =: CM ONE BUREAUCRACY, IF YOU LIKE, TO
ANOTHER; " EST. ERDAY'S PRIVATE FUND EMPLOYEE IS TOMORROWS
MEDIBANK'S EMPLOYEE. HIS VALUE TO THE COMMUNITY REMAINS
THE SAME; THE COMMUNITY. PAYS NOT ONE CENT MORE FOR
HIS WORK OR FOR THE SYSTEM IN WHICH HE WORKS. 
ANOTHER PLE THE EMPLOYEES IN THIS BUILDING ARE
NOT ONLY -3LIC SERVANTS, BUT TAXPAYERS LIKE THE REST
OF THE CC'. JNITYq EVEN THE TAX COLLECTOR PAYS INCOME
TAX, IN A COUNTRY LIKE AUSTRALIA, WHERE ONE
QUARTER OF US ARE ON THE PUBLIC PAYROLL FEDERAL.,
STATE OR LOCAL IT IS A VERY FALSE DIVISION INDEED
TO MAKE BETrEEN PRIVATE EMPLOYEES AND PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
I FIND IT :. OT ONLY UNREAL, BUT RATHER REPREHENSIBLE
AS AN ATTEY. T TO DIVIDE A COMMUNITY ON A VERY FALSE
AND FOOLISH DISTINCTION, I CANNOT SEE TO WHOSE
ADVANTAGE IT IS, POLITICALLY OR ANY OTHER WAY,
TO GENERATE THIS DIVISION, TO CREATE THIS DISTINCTION,
THE IDEA OF THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC SERVICE BEING AN
ISOLATED ELTE IN CANBERRA IS A MYTH,
T-E PROGRA ? AA. T. ENTAL DISPERSAL IN AREAS LIKE
THIS SO THA~ S-L: VCA NTS ARE SEEN TO BE WHAT
THEY TRULY ? E A REAL AND INDISPENSABLE PART OF
THE REAL CCI' " TY AND OF THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
WILL, I TRUST, -EL? DISPEL THAT MYTH. 
IHAVE THAT THIS BUILDING PUTS INTO PRACTrICE OUR
BELIEF lIN *. TIONAL INVOLVEMENT, NATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY
IN AUSTRALT: A'N CITIES AND CENTRES, THERE IS OF COURSE,*
ANOTHER SIDE TO THE COIN, W4HEN THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
BECOMES INVOLVED, IT MUST ALSO SHARE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE LCC..-l _ CONS. EQUENCES OF ITS PLANS.
THE -: GROTh, AT COMES FROM THE ESTABL ISHMENT OF A
CENRE AND OUR OTHER ACTIVITIES IN THIS REGION
PLCETADUNAL PRESSURE ON LOCAL RESOURCES AND
LOCAL SERI/ ES.
THERE 1~ S TO B A FOLLOW THROUGH AND A FOLW-P
AC 0 G_ T7H, SI-AND THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
T_ S7 --zLITIES. THERE " WILL BE A NEED
CNO iT &gt;' IJ z E CO -OP ERATIO0N ' BE TWEEN THE
FERA ~ Y~~ ET rThESTATE GOYERNV1ENT AND LOCAL
: HT GIVE A NEGATIVE EXAMPLE,
A LCNr ' W'AY ARAm ~ T TA -TOWN SIV IL L E,.
THE GRE: AT lNI iOWNISVILLE IN THE LRST DECADE
HAS SPRUNG YELYFROM NATIONAL GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES'.
ACNDT I: T: 3 -THE ARMY BASE, THE AIR FOR'EBAE
THE UNNIVE=, S7_ m'/, THE MARINE INSTITUTE 0 WE UNDLERTOOK
IN 1972 :-~~ TOWNSVILLE, ALONG WITH ALBURY-WODONGA;
A NEW GCT-ZENTRE -THAT IS TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILJITY
FOR THE . ESON LOCAL SERVICES AND. AMENI-TIES RESUILTING
FROM NATICNAL ACTIVITY. v 
4 4" -6-
NON-CO-OPE?=. TJON BY THE GOVERNMENT IN THAT STATE
HAS SO FAR THWARTED THAT UNDERTAKING, IT IS CRUCIAL
FOR THE WELL-BEING OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS REGION
THAT WE HAVE CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE THREE LEVELS
OF GOVERNMEIT HERE.
IF THAT IS FORTHCOMING, THE PROGRAMS OF WHICH THIS
CENTRE IS '. SAT PART, ONE OF THE'FIRST FRUITS,
WILL WORK ' iUIJiNELY FOR THE WELL-BEING OF THIS
HISTORIC CITY, ITS--PEOPLE AND THE REGION ITSELF. 



VICTORIAI FARIERS UNION I
Spepch ro~-tvc ( 7Y I / P,
IN SEVEN WEEKS' TIME WE SHALL BRING DOWN MY GOVERNMENT'S
THIRD BUDGET. CLEARLY IT MUST BE REGARDED AS ONE
OF THE MOST CRUCIAL BUDGETS OF MODERi TIMES, FRAMED
AGAINST A BACKGROUND OF EXTRAORDINARY COMPLEXITY AT
HOME AND ABROAD, LET ME ACKNOWLEDGE AT THE OUTSET
THE GOVERNMENT'S RECOGNITION OF THE HIGH STAKES THAT
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY HA\ E, NOT JUST IN
THE BUDGET ITSELF, BUT IN THE ECONOMIC CONDITIONS WHICH
IT PARTLY CREATES. I SAY " PARTLY" BECAUSE IT SHOULD
BE RECOGNISED THAT FEDERAL GOVERNMENT POLICIES,
MUCH LESS A SINGLE BUDGET, ARE NOT THE SOLE DETERMINING
FACTOR IN THE NATION'S ECONOMY.
THERE ARE FEW NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS WHOSE ECONOMIC POWERS
ARE MORE CIRCUMSCRIBED BY THE CONSTITUTION, BY THE
FEDERAL SYSTEM, BY THE NATURE OF THE ECONOMICS SYSTEM
OF A MIXED ECONOMY. AND BY INTERNATIONAL CONDITIONS
RESULTING FROM OUR POSITION AS ONE OF THE GREAT TRADING
NATIONS. I SAY THIS ONLY TO PUT MATTERS IN PERSPECTIVE,
NOT BY ANY MEANS TO DOWNGRADE OUR PRIMARY AND INESCAPABLE
RESPONSIBILITY AS THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
6~ 
WHILE ACKNOWLEGING YOUR SPECIAL INTEREST IN THE BUDGET,
YOU WILL UNDERSTAND HOWEVER THE CONSIDERABLE RESTRAINT
I AM UNDER AT A STAGE WHEN WE ARE STILL HAVING THE
PRELIMINARY DISCUSSIONS WITH INDUSTRY AND WHEN
THE CABINET DISCUSSIONS ARE ABOUT TO BEGIN.
THE SPECIAL INTEREST FARMERS NATURALLY HAVE IN THE
BUDGET AND ITS OUTCOME SPRINGS FROM TWO SOURCES, ONE
PARTICULAR,. ONE GENERAL. FIRST THERE IS THE
SPECIFIC BUDGETARY MATTER OF GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS TO AND
RECEIPTS FROM AGRICULTURE. THESE ARE A VERY GREAT
AND GROWING FACTOR IN THE BUDGET NOW GREAT ENOUGH
TO BE A VERY SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN THE OVERALL STRATEGY
OF THE BUDGET ITSELF.
BUDGET OUTLAYS FOR ALL AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY WERE
$ 329 MILLION IN 1972/ 73, $ 303 MILLION IN 1973/ 74
AND AN ESTIMATED $ 727 MILLION IN 1974/ 75 AN INCREASE
ON 1973/ 74 OF $ 424 MILLION. RECEIPTS IN THE SAME YEARS
WERE $ 45.6 MILLION, $ 82 MILLION AND $ 178 MILLION.
SO NET GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE WAS $ 283 MILLION IN 1972/ 73,
$ 221 MILLION IN 1973/ 74, AND $ 548 MILLION ESTIMATED IN
1974/ 75. THAT IS, AN INCREASE OF $ 327 MILLION IN 1974/ 75
OVER THE PREVIOUS YEAR. 
THE BIG INCREASE IN OUTLAYS CAME OF COURSE THROUGH
woo/
LOANS TO THE AUSTRALIAN taft CORPORATION TO OPERATE
THE FLOOR PRICE PLAN. IT'S NOT MY INTENTION IN
GIVING THESE FIGURES TO SUGGEST THAT FARMERS ARE THE
* RECIPIENTS OF HUGE AMOUNTS OF GOVERN4MENT LARGESSE,
YOUR PRESIDENT, iR HEFFERNAN, RECENTLY EXPRESSED CONCERN
THAT THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC WAS BEING MISLED INTO
BELIEVIN'G THAT PRIMARY INDUSTRY WAS RECEIVING MASSIVE
HANDOUTS AT THE TAXPAYERS IEXPENSE AND HE RIGHTLY SAID
THAT IN THIS REGARD, THE DISTINCTION SHOULD BE MADE
BETWEEN LOANS AND DIRECT SUBSIDIES. THE POINT I WISH
TO MAKE HOWEVER, IS THAT IN A BUDGET CONTEXT, THE
OUTLAYS AND RECEIPTS ARE OF A MAGNITUDE TO BE A
SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN OVERALL PLANNING.
iHE SECOND, MORE GENERAL INTEREST TO FARMERS, LIES AT
THE VERY HEART OF THE NATURE OF OUR CURRENT ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS. WE ARE ALL DAMAGED BY INFLATION NONE MORE
THAN FARMERS. AND OF COURSE THE INTER-REACTION BETWEEN
COSTS AND PRICES IS MOST ACUTE IN THE CASE OF FARM
PROiJUCI'S PARTICULARLY PRICES FOR FOOD.
IN THE PAST EIGHTEEN MON'THS THE rI: AJOR ECONOMIES OF THE
WOtkLD SEVERELY AFFECT11) BY 14W. OIL P'RICE RISE AND THE
DESTA31LISIN1G L! FFECTS OF THAT ON WORLD TRADE HAV/ E BFEN
STRUGGLING WITH. THE TWIN PROBLEMS OF RISING UNEMPLOYMENT
AND RISING INFLATION. AUSTRALIA HAS NOT BEEN ABLE TO
INSULATE ITSELF FROM THAT WORLD SITUATIONS 
BUT IN AUSTRALIA AS IN OTHER COUNTRIES THE BATTLE IS
NOW ON TO RESTORE A MORE BALANCED ECONOMIC ORDER.
WE ARE SEEING ECONOMIC GROWTH BEGINNING AGAIN.
THE RISE IN UNEMPLOYMENT SEEMS TO HAVE COME TO AN END
AND 1975/ 76 PROMISES TO SEE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
ON THE INCREASE AGAIN. BUT INFLATION REMAINS DEEP-SEATED.
FIRM AND RESPONSIBLE POLICIES WILL HAVE TO BE FOLLOWED
IF IT IS TO BE BROUGHT UNDER CONTROL.
SOME OF THE UNCERTAINTIES THAT SURROUNDED THE OUTLOOK
FOR INFLATION EARLIER THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN CLEARED BY THE
DECISIONS OF THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION
IN THE NATIONAL WAGE AND METAL INDUSTRIES CASES.
THOSE WERE RESPONSIBLE DECISIONS, GOVERNMENTS MUST ALSO
DO ALL THEY CAN TO CREATE AN ECONOMIC CLIMATE IN WHICH
THE SUGGESTED WAGE DETERMINATION GUIDELINES HAVE THE
PROSPECT OF BEING ADHERED TO.
WE AIM TO ENSURE THAT THE RECOVERY IN THE ECONOMY
STRENGTHENS AND CONTINUES BUT DOES NOT REACH A PACE THAT
ONCE AGAIN LEADS TO A SCRAMBLE FOR RESOURCES.
AN ORDERLY RECOVERY WILL HELP ACHIEVE A CLIMATE CONDUCIVE
TO THE EXPANSION OF INVESTMENT THAT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE
CONTINUED PROSPERITY AND GROWTH OF EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES,
ONE THING IS CLEAR THEE HAS * i OI L. E ABATcET THE
RATE OF INCREASE ? iJ GOV! ER:. T sPENDING IF WE ARE TO GET OULi
OF OUR PRESENT TROUBLES.
r P 2 
BUT IT IS A GROSS OVERSIMPLIFICATION TO IMAGINE THAT
THE WHOLE SOLUTION TO THOSE TROUBLES LIES IN THAT
ONE AREA ALONE. GOVERNMENT SPENDING IS JUST ONE
OF THE THREE MAJOR INTERNAL FACTORS DETERMINING THE
PRESSURE ON RESOURCES AND INFLATION WHICH MAY RESULT
FROM IT. THE OTHER FACTORS ARE INCOMES AND CREDIT
WHICH ARE NOT DIRECTLY DETERMINED BY THE BUDGET.
IN THE BUDGET WE WILL BE STRIVING TO CREATE THE
CONDITIONS WHERE THE WAGE INDEXATION PROPOSALS CAN
HAVE A CHANCE TO WORK
IN PREVIOUS ADDRESSES TO FARM ORGANISATIONS I HAVE
ALWAYS STRESSED THE INTERDEPENDENCE BETWEEN THE RURAL
SECTOR AND THE REST OF THE ECONOMY. I HAVE NEVER
ACCEPTED THE FALSE DIVISION BETWEEN COUNTRY AND CITY.
IT IS A FALSE DISTINCTION ECONOMICALLY, SOCIALLY AND
POLITICALLY. THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A TIME WHEN THE
INTERDEPENDENCE WAS MADE MORE MANIFEST BY THE INTER-REACTION
OF ONE SECTION OF THE ECONOMY ON ANOTHER, WHEN THE
PROBLEMS OF ONE SECTION AFFECTED THE PROBLEMS OF EVERY
OTHER SO CLOSELY AND QUICKLY. WE ARE ALL AFFECTED BY
OUR DEPENDENCE ON EACH OTHER AND WE ARE ALL AFFECTED BY
OUR INTERDEPENDENCE WITH OUR TRADING PARTNERS.
INFLATION DEMONSTRATES THIS VERY CLEARLY, OFTEN VERY
IHAkSHLY. v. I.
i
i l W Jt+,"
h + I
I J T i.
s
m " t 
WE HAVE SEEN HOW EASY IT IS FOR EMPLOYEES TO PRICE
THEMSELVES OR THEIR FELLOWS OUT OF A JOB EQUALLY,
IT IS VERY EASY TO PRICE OURSELVES OUT OF MARKETS,
PARTICULARLY FOR A GREAT TRADING NATION LIKE AUSTRALIA
AND PRIMARY PRODUCTION STILL ACCOUNTS FOR THE
MAJOR PART OF OUR EXPORTS IN4FLATION IS THE COMMON
ENEMY WHATEVER SECTOR OF THE ECONO0MY 1~__ WE ARE
A
INVOLVED.
ONE OF THE MOST CONSIDERABLE PROBLEMS OF COMMUNICATION
AT THE POLITICAL LEVEL IS TO GET ACROSS THE CONSEQUENCES
OF OUR ROLE AS A TRADING NATION, ON THE SURFACE IT
SEEMS SIMPLE ENOUGH. IT IS EASY ENOUGH TO SAY
" AUSTRALIA IS ONE OF THE WIORLD'S GREAT TRADIN4G NATIONS".
THE PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONJS ARE NOT SO EASILY, GRASPED OR
APPRECIATED. THERE ARE VERY VOCAL ELEME14TS IN THE
COMMUNITY WHO WOULD PRESSURE OOVERNMENTS VIRTUALLY TO
CUT OFF ALL IMPORTS, OR AT LEAST THOSE IMPORTS WHICH
AFFECT THEIR INDUSTRY. LESS BLATANTLY, IT TAKES THE
FORM OF DEMANDS FOR ALL SORTS OF TARIFFS AND QUOTAS
AND RESTRICTIONS, BUT WE HAVE TO LOOK BEYOND THE DEMANDS
OF ANY PARTICULAR INDUSTRY TO THE EFFECT OF A DECISION
ON THE ECONOMY A WHOLE AND IN PARTICULAR OF OUR OVERALL
POSITION AS A TRAD) ING NATION. 
THE BASIS OF UNLIMITED PRODU. CTIOi.. O INDUSTRY CAN
THOSEP EOPLE WHO WANT UI N ASU STRALIA TO CUT OFF IMPORTSNMENT
HAS CAUSTRALIA SHOULD REMEMBER THAT WHEN WE DOCTUHET SF ACT
AND TO THE EXTENT WE DO IT WAE GSRPEOAITL THE CASE WE CAN
PRESENT TO COUNTRIES WHICH CUT OFF IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA.
THIS BIS VERY RELEVANT TO PRIMARY INDUSTRY. 0 INDUSTRY CAN
ASSUME IT HAS A RIGHT TO SURVIVE, NOBEEN MORE DIFFICULT
INFFOR ME TO ARGUE FORCEFULLY WITH THE COUTRIES MOAFT ESTERN
HOW COSTLY, SIMPLY BECAUSE IT EXISTS.
THOSE PEOPL WHO EW ANT US IN ABOUT THE STLOA SCHUINTG OFF IMPORTS
TBEE IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE WE IN AUSTRALIA
HAVE HAD THEE XTENT WE IM PFORROTMS THOSE COUNTRIES. CAINWE
WE CUT OFF IMPORTS ANDWC HOIIUFCNH T ORTIHEESR CUT OFF FROM AUSOTURRA LEIXAPORTS
THIS ISOENVE EROYF US IS POORER, WHETHER WE LIVE IN CITIES ORINDUSTRY
IN THE COUNTRY VISITS REGION ON ACNAYN LPIAVRET ICULAR
INDUSTRY, IF TRADE OVER-ACEFULL STAGNATES OR DIES OF ESTERN
EUROPE OR JAPAN OR AMERICA ABOUT THE SLASHING OF THEIR
BEEF IMPORTS FROM AUSTRALIA, BECAUSE WE IN AUSTRALIA
HAVE HAD TO REDUCE IMPORTS FROM THOSE COUNTRIES, IF
WE CUT OFF IMPORTS AND IF OTHER COUNTRIES CUT OFF OUR EXPORTS,
EVERY ONE OF US IS POORER, WHETHER WE LIVE IN CITIES OR
IN THE COUNTRY. INI0 REGION CAN LIVE ON ANY PARTICULAR
INDUSTRY, IF TRADE OVER-ALL STAGNATES OR DIES. 
' o
IN PURSUIT OF THE FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVE OF TRADE
PROMOTION;, MY GOVERNMENT HAS MADE MORE TRADE TREATIES
WITH OTHER COUNTRIES THAN ANY PREVIOUS GOVERNMENT.
WE HAVE RE-NEGOTIATED MANY OF THOSE WHICH EXISTED.
WE HAVE BEEN PARTICULARLY ACTIVE IN OUR OWN REGION$
FOR IT IS CLEAR THAT INDUSTRIES WHICH USED TO DEPEND
SOLELY ON THE MARKETS OF WESTERN EUROPE AND BRITAIN,
HAVE NOT AS GOOD A FUTURE AS THOSE INDUSTRIES
WHICH HAVE PROSPECTS IN THE MARKET IN OUR NEIGHBOURHOOD. 
IN THE C. O. N EXT OF THES~ E GENEIRAL REMARK(
INOW ADDRESS MYSELF TO SOME QUESTIONS WHICH
YOUR EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ' IR FORSTER, HAS
INDICATED YOU WOULD LIK'E ME TO ANSWER.
I MUST SAY( THE QUESTION4S TEJD TO BE SHORT ON
SPECIFICS AND LON~ G 0: 1 ARGUMENT SO0 YOU W1LL
FORGIVE ME IF I TEND TO RESPOND IN KIND. 
" QUESTION: As IT IS LIKELY THAT THE SECOND ALLOCATION OF
CARRY-ON FINANCE FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FOR THE
BEEF INDUSTRY WILL BE INSUFFICIENT TO MEET THE DEMAND
FROM ELIGIBLE PRODUCERS, WOULD THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
CONSIDER MAKING THE BALANCE OF THE ORIGINAL ALLOCATION
AVAILABLE AT THE CONCESSIONAL INTEREST RATE OF 4% o AND
ADJUST THE LOANS OF THOSE PRODUCERS WHO HAVE ALREADY
BORROWED AT 11.5%?
THERE HAVE BEEN TWO SCHEMES ANNOUNCED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FOR THE PROVISION OF CARRY ON FINANCE FOR
BEEF PRODUCERS. THE FIRST SCHEME, ANNOUNCED LATE LAST YEAR,
INVOLVED AN ALLOCATION OF $ 20 MILLION FOR LOANS THROUGH
THE COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK AT COMMERCIAL RATES
OF INTEREST THEN 11., BUT LATER CUT TO 11% IN LINE
WITH A GENERAL REDUCTION IN BANK RATES. AT THAT TIME
THE GOVERNMENT WAS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST BY THE
AUSTRALIAN I'IATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S COUNCIL FOR SPECIAL FUNDS
AT COMMERCIAL RATES. THE COUNCIL DID NOT SEEK CONCESSIONAL
INTEREST RATES. I UNDERSTAND THAT AT LEAST $ 13 MILLION
OF THE $ 20 MILLION ALLOCATION HAS BEEN LENT ALREADY AT
COMMERCIAL RATES OF INTEREST. , A2 
fl~
ON APRIL 23 THIS YEAR, SENATOR I'RIEDT ANNOUNCED THAT
THE GOVERNMENT WOULD MATCH A $ 19.6 MILLION OFFER BY THE
STATES FOR CARRY-ON FINANCE FOR BEEF PRODUCERS.
LOANS ARE AT 11 WITH NO INTEREST OR CAPITAL REPAYMENTS
IN THE FIRST 12 MONTHS. IT IS STILL TOO EARLY
TO. KNOW IF IT WILL BE SUFFICIENT. IUCH WILL DEPEND
ON THE BEEF MARKET AND HOW QUICKLY IT RECOVERS.
THE MOST HOPEFUL SIGN IS LAST WEEK S ANNOUNCEMENT BY
JAPAN THAT IT IS RE-OPENING ITS MARKET FOR AUSTRALIAN
BEEF. FURTHER, AS AT 31 SARCTHH, E AUSTRALIAN HERD
IS SMALLER BY ABOUT 1 MILLION HEAD. THAN HAD BEEN EXPECTED
ON THE BASIS OF PAST GROWTH.
ON APRIL 23 '. RIEDT SAID THAT THE PROGRESS OF THE SCHEME
WOULD BE REVIEWED AT THE END OF THREE MONTHS.
THE GOVERNMENT WILL CONSIDER THE RESULTS OF THAT REVIEW
AND ANY REQUESTS FOR CHANGES IN THE SCHEME OR
ADDITIONAL FUNDS THAT MAY EMERGE. 
QUESTION: DOES THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WISH THE DAIRY FARMERS
OF AUSTRALIA TO PRODUCE FOR THE EXPORT MARKET AT THE
SAME TIME ENSURING BY SUCH PRODUCTION THAT THERE WILL BE
SUFFICIENT SUPPLIES OF DAIRY PRODUCTS PRODUCED IN
AUSTRALIA TO MEET AUSTRALIA'S DOMESTIC NEEDS?
IF SO, WILL THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PAY A BOUNTY ON
ALL EXPORTS OF DAIRY PRODUCTS EQUAL TO THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE ACTUAL EXPORT PRICE AND AN UNDERWRITTEN
PRICE WHICH WOULD APPROXIMATE THE HOME PRICE NOW
BEING FIXED BY THE PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL?
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S WISH IS THAT AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION, INCLUDING DAIRYING, BE GEARED TO MARKET DEMANDS,
IT DOES NOT MAKE COMMERCIAL GOOD SENSE TO PRODUCE WITHOUT
REGARD TO MARKET TRENDS AND PRICES. ' IE WANT OUR POLICIES
TO BE FAIR TO PRODUCERS, CONSUIMERS AND TAXPAYERS.
BOUNTY PAYMENTS CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY TAXPAYERS INCLUDING
THOSE WHO, AS CONSUMERS, ALREADY PROVIDE FOR SOME
PRODUCTS HIGHER DOMESTIC PRICES THAN ARE AVAILABLE OVERSEAS,
EXPERIENCE HAS SHOW: I THAT BOUNTY PAYMENTS RELATED TO
PRODUCTION LEAD TO PROBLEMS OF DISPOSAL ON WORLD MARKETS
AT UNECONOMIC PRICES. A BOUNTY ON EXPORTS WOULD HAVE
A SIMILAR EFFECT IF THERE IS NO INCENTIVE TO RELATE
PRODUCTION TO AVAILABLE ECONOMIC IMARKETS THE REAL
OBJECTIVE THW IINDUSTRY SdOULD SET FOR ITSELF, Ig uaI
CI~-C-r 4-
OWING TO THE ENORMOUS. AND CONTINUING INCREASE IN THE COST
OF TRANSPORT, SUPERPHOSPHATE AND OTHER FARM REQUIREMEjNTS
NARROWING THE GAP BETW.-EEJ. FARN COSTS AND INCOME, CAN
YOU GIVE FARMERS ANY INSURANCE AT ALL OR EVEN HOPETHAT
THEIR INVESTMENTS IN PRODUCTION WILL YIELD A RETURN?
FARMING IS3 A BUSINESS AI1D PREDOMINANTLY IT IS UP TO
THE FARMER TO ESTIMATE WHETHER A DECISIONJ TO PRODUCE
A CERTAIN COMHODITY WI1LL YI'ELD A RETURNE i N T
THE 6OVERNMENT HAS SUPPORTED THE RECONSTRUCTION SCHEME
AIND IHAS INTRODUCED SPECIAL INDUSTRY SCHEMES TO HELP
IN THE PROCESS. IT' S NOT POSSIB3LE OR DESIRABLE FOR ANY
oOVER~ IIHEN'T TO GUARAI T'LE A RETURN IF THIS FLIES IiN THE
FACE OF MARKET FORCES. IN SO FAR AS PEOPLE MUST EAT
AND BE CLOTHED THERE WILL ALWAYS BE A RETURN ON INVESTME11T
IN AN EFFICIENT AND SELF RELIA* JT AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY.
IBELIEVE THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR WILL IREMAIN ANl AVENUE
FOR PROFITABLE RESOURCE USE. 
A. NL. j VII
WOULD NOT A MAJOR. PROPORTION OF THE MONEY WHICH
THE 6JOVER1NMEI-IT SPENDS ON WELFARE A14D UNEMPLOYMENT SCHEMES
BE PUT TO BETTER USE IN SUBSIDISING CON4SUMER PRICE
INDEX ITEMS AT RAW MATERIAL LEVEL THEREBY HOLDING PRICES
AND GIVING INDUSTRY A CHNCE TO STABILISE AND PLAN?
AgswER: FUNDS FOR PENSIONS, U!' JEMPLOYME; IT RELIEF,
THE R. E. D. SCHEME ETC., ADD TO CONSUIMER DEMAND FOR
GD:, TAKING FUNDS AWAY FR01* 1 A'IREAS WOULD
REDUCE DEMAND.
14HAT WOULD BE THE COST OF CONSUAER SUBSIDIES?
1.1HAT PRODUCTS WOULD BE SUBSIDISED? HOW WOULD
A SUBSIDY Oil ONE PRODUCT EFFECT DEIMAND FOR AND THEI
PROFITABILITY OF ANiOTHER? WOULD YOU END
SUCH A SYSTEM IN1 THE FUTURE WITHOUT GREAT DISRUPTION'?
IWOULD INSTAN4CE THlE WAR-TINE DAIRY BOUJNTY THAT WAS
CONTINUED AND BECAME L; UILT IN4TO THE PRICE OF LAND
AND WAS OF NO LASTING B3ENEFIT TO PRODUCERS AND
DISTURBEDT THE ALLOCATION OF RSESOURCES IN DAIRYING.
IN SHORT, TH4E GOVFRNMNT PRLFERS PEOPLE TO HAVE FUNDS
TO MAKE THEIP OWN CONSUMPTION CHOICES AND NOT BE
SUBSIDISED AT THE OTHER END EXCEPT IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIM-E MINISTER,
THE HION. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE 1975 AUSTRALIAN LEGAL CONVENTION
CANBERRA, 2-JULY 1975
Many of the matters proposed at earlier
conventions have been debated in the Parliament in this
city since the last convention. Many of the matters I
myself mentioned at that convention have been discussed
here. Some have come to fruition; others have not done so,
at least not yet. At the 10th Australian'Legal Convention
in 1957, Sir Owen Dixon suggested a federal Law Reform
Committee to prepare and promulgate draft reforms for
adopt'ion by the Parliaments of Australia and the States.
He pointed out that in all or nearly all matters of
private law there is no geographical reason why the law
should be different in any part of Australia. Is it
not unworthy of Australia as a nation, he asked, that we have
varying laws affecting the relations between man and man?
If I may quote Tacitus corruptissima
republica plurimae leges: The Commonwealth is most marred
when it has most laws.
At long' last, * that suggestion by Sir Owen
Dixon has borne fruit. An Act of the Australian Parliament
has established a Law Reform Commission. The Commission
has been charged Wi. th the task of preparing proposals for
the reform of laws, not only on matters within the direct
competence of " the Australian Parliament, but on matters
on which it is desirable that there should be uniformity
of law in the States and Territories. The Commission
has a full-time Chairman, Mr Justice Michael Kirby, and
five part-time members. We have sought, by advertisement,
indications of interest from lawyers throughout Australia
in being appointed as full-time members of the Commission.
Without waiting to be fully established,
the Commission has embarked on its first reference, the
difficult and delicate task of reconciling the protection
of civil liberties with the requirement for strong and
effective police action at the national level to combat
the growth in sophisticated crime.
A paper entitled ' The Necessity for a New
Federal Court' was delivered at the 13th Legal Convention
in Hobart in January 1963 by Mr Maurice Byers, Q. C.,
and Mr Paul Toose, now respectively the
Solicitor-General of Australia and judge of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales. In the discussions
on the paper the Solicitor-General Sir Kenneth Bailey, Q. C.,
announced on behalf of the Attorney-General, Sir Garfield
B~ arwick, that the Cabinet had authorised him to design a newfederal
superior court. Sir Kenneth went on to say that the 
paper would be of material assistance to Sir Garfield whose
congratulations be extended to the learned authors.
Attorney-General Bowen delivered a paper
on the proposal for the 15th Legal Convention on
17 July 1967. He declared that there was a broad
concensus that such a court should be established. He
stated categorically that ' a decision has been taken to
establish.. the court' and that arguments advanced
against the idea are now ' academic'.
He presented a Corrconwealth Superior
Court Bill on 21 November 1968. My Government's bill, although
promised at both the 1972 and 1974 elections, has beentwice
rejected by the Senate. There has in fact been
much lobbying by State Supreme Court judges.
Following the report of the Sen~ ate
Committee on Securities and Exchange, the Government
has introduced the Corporations and Securibies Industry
Bill to establish a Securities and . Exchange Commission
to provide where regulation is necessary, a proper
regulation of the securities industry on a nationl basis.
Finally, work is well advanced on the
preparation of a National Companies Bill. When this is
enacted it will end the frustration suffered by companies
who wish to operate on a national basis but find themselves
confronted with eight set"-s of company laws. The high
hopes that were entertained with the enactment in each
State and Territory of the uniform Companies Act in the
early 1960' s have not been realised:* Mr John Young, Q. C.,
and Mr Rodd delivered a paper to the 13th ConventCion in
1963. The late Mr Justice H-ardie said then it would
have to be a federal act.
Debate on the National Compensation
legislation, to supplant the litigation based on compulsory
workers' compensation insurance and compulsory third
party insurance, awaits a report from a Senate committee.
I hasten to add that lawyers will be amply
compensated by new fields of jurisprudence arising
from legislation on consumer affairs and the environment
and family law and on international conventions dealing
with matters of commerce and liability and human rights.
And although this gathering would have a smaller percentage
of women present in their own right as distinct from their
being consorts, we can point out in International
Women's Year that the Government has appointed four women
to the Arbitration Commission, two of them presidential
members. ./ 3 
In the past the development of a proper system
of administrative law in Australia has been sadly lacking.
The independence of the judiciary has been largely an
irrelevant safeguard in the face of increasing areas of
government-regulation that have not been subject toreview
by the ordinary courts. The reports of the Commonwealth
Administrative Review Committee, more commonly known as the
Kerr Committee, and of the Committee on Administrative
Discretions, more commonly known as the Bland Committee,
have highlighted the need to enable administrative decisions
affecting individuals to be reviewed on their merits.
They have also shown the need for an independent body to
ensure that an individual has been dealt with fairly by
the Public Service and by statutory bodies. To satisfy these
needs, the Government has introduced into the Parliament
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Bill and the
Ombudsman Bill. They have received strong support on both
sides of the Parliament. The Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Bill place's emphasis on expedition and informality
in the hearing of appeals. It will not be confined to the
traditional role of umpire in an adversary dispute.
Nevertheless, it will provide an opportunity for lawyers
to bring their particular skills to bear in ensuring that
statutory discretions are justly and properly exercised.
When I spoke at the last Convention I
stressed that not only must the courts always be accessible
to the people but that the profession must also be accessible
to the people. Perfect laws and well-organised courts are of
little use if those who most need the protection of the law
cannot afford access to the courts. An essential part of
the Government's program of law reform is its development of
systematic and comprehensive legal aid in Australia. A
great deal has been done by the legal profession itself, but
the provision of legal aid to all those who require it is a
task beyond the scope of the legal profession. it
requires the resources of government. The Australian Government
has done three things. We have had a committee of inquiry into
the provision of legal aid in Australia, the report
of which has highlighted the areas of need. We have provided
funds for existing legal aid schemes. We have established
the Australian Legal Aid office as a salaried service to
provide legal aid in areas where the Australian Government
has particular concerns and responsibilities. The
Government introduced the Legal Aid Bill in the last week
of the Autumn Sittings of the Parliament, so that it may
be open to suggestions for improvement. I hope the legal
profession will use the opportunity that has been given
to them to comment on the Legal Aid Bill.
I want to see the continued development of
a vigorous and independent legal profession. The
maintenance of much of our democratic tradition depends
on the strength and integrity of an independent profession
in representing the citizen, whether against another citizen,
a-large corporation or the Executive Government itself.
There is, I know, a real fear that this independence and 
traditions may become lost in a salaried legal aid service.
Any lawyer, whether a private practitioner or an employee
of a salaried legal aid service, has a duty to uphold
these traditions. We have sought to embody this in
the Legal Aid Bill. There are many in the community today who
doubt the capacity of the courts and the legal system
to play a useful role in new areas of social and economic
concern. It is not only those with money and property
or those who are engaged in commerce who need lawyers.
Lawyers in the past have been in the forefront
in urging reform of the law. They are in a position to
identify and expose the shortcomings of the law. The
legal profession must be careful to maintain this tradition
in the face of the changing expectations of the people.
Otherwise-they will be seen as conservative defenders
of a system that will become irrelevant if it does not
respond to the dem-and for change. Indeed I go further.
Lawyers applying their talents and skills, should continue
to lead the demand for change and not wait to be pushed
by public opinion. I believe we want a world in which the
rights of citizens, rich or poor, are effectively protected
by a vigorous legal profession; in which the mechanism
of the law remains a primary and effective instrument.
It is easy for the public to feel alienated from the law
and the lawyers.. I suggest that it is up to the Government
and the lawyers to see that this feeling of alienation
is replaced by a recognition of the law as a relevant,
accessible and useful instrument for social and economic
adjustment and for protecting the legitimate expectations
of the individual in an increasingly complex, domestic
and international society. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G, WHITLAM,
AT THE AUSTRALIAN-AM1ERICAN ASSOCIATION BALLA
SYDNEY, 4I JULY 1975
Two YEARS AGO ON 19 JULY 1973 THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES, IN A MESSAGE TO THE PRIME MINISTER
OF AUSTRALIA, INVITED THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE TO JOIN
IN COMMEMiORATING THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION ON ITS
200TH ANNIVERSARY. THE INVITATION SAID IN PART:
" THE PRESIDENT AND PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES HOPE
THAT OUR TWO COUNTRIES CAN USE THE OCCASION TO FOSTER
NOT ONLY PERSONAL CONTACTS BUT THE WIDEST POSSIBLE
RANGE OF FRUITFUL INTERCHANGE AMONG PEOPLE
IN THE REALMS BOTH OF IDEAS AND OF ACTIONS." i / 2 
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED THAT
INVITATION WITH THE UTMOST READINESS AND PLEASURE.
SO YOUR FUNCTION THIS EVENING COMES ON THE EVE
OF WIDER AND MORE ELABORATE CELEBRATIONS PLANNED
FOR NEXT* YEAR, THOSE CELEBRATIONS WILL HAVE THE
SUPPORT AND ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IN A NUMBER OF WAYS AND IN A MOMENTI
SHALL SAY SOMETHING OF WHAT WE PROPOSE TO DO.
THE BIRTH OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC WAS ONE OF THOSE
WATERSHEDS IN HUMAN HISTORY THAT WILL BE COMMEMORATED
BY. DEMOCRATS EVERYWHERE EXPECIALLY IN ENGLISH-.
SPEAKING COUNTRIES -FOR AS LONG AS DEMOCRACY SURVIVES.
IN TWO CENTURIES NOTHING HAS DIMINISHED THE POWER
AND SPLENDOUR OF THE WORDS OF THE AMERICAN DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCE, WITH ITS NOBLE CONFIRMATION OF HUMAN
DIGNITY, ITS UNFORGETTABLE AFFIRMATION OF THE EQUALITY
OF ALL MEN AND THEIR RIGHTS TO LIFE, LIBERTY
AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. THOSE WORDS, SO
FAMILIAR, YET FRESH AND IMPERISHABLE, STILL FIRE THE
HEARTS AND MINDS OF MEN -AND THERE WAS NEVER A TIME,
ISUGGEST, WHEN THEIR MESSAGE WAS MORE RELEVANT, MORE
NEEDEDITHAT IT IS TODAY. 
I HAVE A NUMBER OF ANNOUNCEMENTS TO MAKE
THIS EVENING, SO I DO NOT WANT TO EXPATIATE FOR LONG
ON THE SENTIMENTS AND VALUES THAT UNDERLIE THIS
ANNIVERSARY. BEYOND QUESTION, THOSE SENTIMENTS, THOSE
VALUES DEMOCRACY, FREEDOM, THE RULE OF LAW ARE
DEEPLY AND PASSIONATELY HELD BY ALL OF US IN THIS ROOM,
AND BY THE VAST MAJORITY OF AMERICAN AND AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE. BUT THERE IS A SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE IN THIS
OCCASION BECAUSE IT WILL BE ONE OF THE LAST TIMES
WHEN WE WILL HAVE THE COMPANY -AT LEAST IN HIS
PRESENT CAPACITY -OF A 63REAT AMERICAN, A GREAT
DIPLOMATIST, A GREAT FRIEND OF AUSTRALIA, AMBASSADOR
MARSHALL GREEN. I PAY A SPECIAL TRIBUTE TO HIM. I
FIRST MET HIM v4 1964 IN WASHINGTON AT A PRIVATE
DINNER; NEXT IN JAKARTA, HE WAS APPOINTED UNITED
STATES AMBASSADOR To AUSTRALIA IN 1973, SHORTLY AFTER:.
THE CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT, AT A TIME, ICONFESS, WHEN
IT WAS EASY FOR OUR TWO NATIONS, OLD FRIENDS AS THEY
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN, TO MISUNDERSTAND EACH OTHER't S PURPOSES.
THERE WERE EVEN SOME WHO LABELLED HIM A HATCHET MANI*
WHATEVER THAT MAY MEAN, SUPPOSE THERE ARE TIMES WHEN
ALL OF US MUST USE THE HATCHET, GEORGE WASHINGTON IS
SAID TO HAVE DONE so, BUT I MUST SAY THAT I FOUND HIM
UNFAILINGLY AMIABLE, COURTEOUS, UNDERSTANDING, SYMPATHETIC.
To AUSTRALIA, AND OF COURSE, AN AMBASSADOR OF THE UTMOST
PROFESSIONAL SKILL AND INTELLIGENCE. WE OWE A VERY GREAT
DEAL TO MARSHALL GREEN. No AMERICAN HAS DONE MORE TO
DEVELOP AND STRENGTHEN THE FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND
THE UNITED STATES, AND TO PLACE THAT FRIENSHIP ON A NEW BASIS
OF MATURITY AND HEALTHY UNDERSTANDING ON BOTH SIDES# 
IT IS NOT SO LONG SINCE THERE WAS A GREAT
DEAL OF SILLY AND MISCHIEVOUS TALK IN THIS COUNTRY
ABOUT A STRAINED RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AMERICA AND
AUSTRALIA. YOU DON'T HEAR THAT TALK ANY MORE, AND
IT WAS NEVER REALLY TRUE, EXCEPT* IN THE MOST SUPERFICIAL
SENSE. OF COURSE IT WAS POSSIBLE TO PLAY UP
ISOLATED STATEMENTS, BUT THE REALLY ENDURING QUALITIES
IN OUR RELATIONSHIP HAVE ALWAYS EXISTED AND HAVE NEVER
BEEN CHALLENGED.-THAT IS NOT TO SAY THAT OUR
RELATIONSHIP IS THE SAME AS IT ALWAYS WAS, IT IS
NOT;~ BUT THE CHANGES IN TONE, * IN QUALITY, IN EMPHASIS,
HAVE BEEN ALTOGETHER BENEFICIAL AND WERE IN FACT
INEVITABLE. NO ONE HAS ACKNOWLEDGED AND DESCRIBED THIS
NEW RELATIONSHIP ONE OF DEEPER MUTUAL RESPECTJ#
OF MATURITY, OF HEALTHY CANDOUR, OF REAL FRIENDSHIP
BASED ON A FRANK RECOGNITION OF OUR PARTICULAR NATIONAL
INTERESTS WITH GREATER ELOQUENCE THAN MARSHALL GREEN.
No ONE HAS DONE MORE TO BRING-ABOUT THESE CHANGES1
OUR RELATIONSHIP IS VERY MUCH STRONGER AS A RESULT.
IT IS RARE THAT I AM ABLE TO QUOTE THE PRESS IN
SUPPORT OF my GOVERNMENT ESPECIALLY THESE DAYS -BUT
I THINK THE FINANCIAL REVIEW PUT THE SITUATION FAIRLY
IN THESE WORDS ON TUESDAY:
" THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ALLIANCE HAS
WEATHERED THIS FLUID PERIOD REMARKABLY WELL,
A PERIOD IN WHICH ONE SIDE WAS STRUGGLING TO
ESTABLISH A MORE INDEPENDENT IDENTITY AND THE
OTHER TO MAINTAIN ITS POWER AND PRESTIGE IN A
RAPIDLY CHANGING WORLD. sm 
i R GREEN ACKNOWLEDGED THIS AND PLAYED A
VERY EXPERIENCED HAND IN CANBERRA. HE WAS
PROFESSIONAL ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT THE
INTERESTS OF BASICALLY LIKE-MINDED NATIONS
WOULD ULTIMATELY TRANSCEND A CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT,
CLASH OF PERSONALITIES AND MINOR DIFFERENCES
IN POLICY
T ACCEPT THAT JUDGMENT. AMBASSADOR GREEN
IS NOW MOVING TO MORE EXALTED LEVELS, BUT WE SHALL
ALL MISS HIM IN AUSTRALIA. WE SHALL WISH HIM WELL.
HE AND I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR TO BE JOINT
PATRONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN FESTIVAL TO BE
HELD IN SYDNEY NEXT MARCH AND APRIL AS PART OF THE
BICENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS. FOLLOWING THE MOTTO OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION BICENTENNIAL ADMINISTRATION
" A PAST TO REMEMBER, A FUTURE TO MOULD" THE
FESTIVAL PROMISES TO BE AN EVENT OF TRULY MEMORABLE
IMPORTANCE, A GREAT DEAL OF PLANNING HAS ALREADY
BEEN DONE, AND MUCH-OF IT WILL BE FAMILIAR TO YOU
SCHOOL PAGEANTS, DRAMA, MUSIC AND BALLET PERFORMANCES,
THE " SISTER CITIES" PROGRAM, I COMMEND ALL THOSE
INVOLVED I* N THESE PLANS, TONIGHT, HOWEVER, I WANT
TO MENTION SOME OF THE SPECIFIC PROPOSALS FOR WHICH THE
AUSTRAL: AN GOVERNMENT IS RESPONSIBLE. o. ,/ 6 
FIRST, I HAVE HAD THE HONOUR TO INVITE VICE-PRESIDENT
NELSON-RoCKEFELLER TO VISIT AUSTRALIA FOR THE FESTIVAL.
HE HAS ACCEPTED. I AM HOPEFUL THAT HIS VISIT WILL TAKE
PLACE IN MARCH. SOME '. OF YOU WILL RECALL THAT WE HAD A
VISIT FROM ANOTHER ROCKEFELLER IN MARCH AND APRIL
THIS YEAR THE PRESIDENT OF THE MUSEUM OF MODERN ART
IN NEW YORK, BLANCHETTE ROCKEFELLER. MRS JOHN D.
ROCKEFELLER 111, SISTER-IN-LAW OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS
A GREAT LADY, THE* MOST ELEGANT OF PATRICIANS!
WE THOUGHT IT ONLY PROPER, IN INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
YEAR, THAT THE FEMALE ROCKEFELLER SHOULD* COME HERE FIRST$
( THE MODERN MASTERS EXHIBITION, INCIDENTALLY, ATTRACTED
382,000 VISITORS. THERE'S NOT DOUBT THAT A ROCKEFELLER
CAN PULL IN THE CROWDS).
MUCH CAREFUL THOUGHT HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE
ROLE AUSTRALIA SHOULD PLAY IN CELEBRATING THE
BICENTENNIAL IN THE UNITED STATES HERSELF, THE GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN ASSISTED IN THIS BY AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF 24
DISTINGUISHED CITIZENS LED BY PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK, A. C.
I NOTICE THAT SOME OF THEM ARE WITH US TONIGHT. ON THEIR
RECOMMENDATION THE GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO ENDOW A
CHAIR OF AUSTRALIAN STUDIES AT HARVARD. PRELIMINARY
TALKS WITH HARVARD HAVE ESTABLISHED THAT THE CHAIR WILL BE
AT RESEARCH LEVEL AND FORM A CENTRE FOR AUSTRALIAN
STUDIES BY OTHER AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES. THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF DETAILS TO BE WORKED OUT. WE SHALL WANT.'
TO TAKE ACCOUNT OF HARVARD'S WISHES IN THIS REGARD. 9 a./ 7 
IT IS HOPE THAT THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
CHAIR BE A FIRST STEP ONLY. WE HOPE IT WILL
FORM TE NUCLEUS OF EXPANDED AND CONTINUING ACADEMIC
STUDIES IN AMERICA OF ALL ASPECTS OF AUSTRALIA AND
OF AUSTRALIAN INTERESTS IN A WIDER REGIONAL CONTEXT,
I COMMEND THIS PROPOSAL TO THE GREAT COMPANIES AND
CORP0RAAT-: NS MANY OF WHOSE REPRESENTATIVES ARE HERE
TONIGHT WHICH OPERATE IN OUR TWO COUNTRIES, SOME
OF THEME I TRUST, WILL SEE IN THE CHAIR A FOCAL
POINT F2R FURTHER RESEARCH ENDOWMENTS IN THEIR OWN
NAMES IN DISCIPLINES OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO THEM.
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PLANS TO SPONSOR
A FELLOWSHI? PROGRAM TO FACILITATE EXCHANGE VISITS
BY A NON-ACADEMIC CROSS SECTION OF THE COMMUNITY
FARMERS, BUSINESSMEN, CIVIC LEADERS, TRADE UNIONISTS
BETJEEH AUS-? ALIA AND AMERICA, WE SHALL SUPPORT
AN AMERICAN TOUR BY THE AUSTRALIAN YOUTH ORCHESTRA
AND ART, CRAFTS, AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS. WE SHALL
SET ASIDE FUNDS TO ENABLE AUSTRALIANS TO PARTICIPATE IN
SPECIFIC EENTS ARRANGED BY AMERICAN STATES, CITIES
AND INSTITUTIONS. FOR EXAMPLE, THE SMITHSONIAN
INSTITUTION THE BIGGEST MUSEUM COMPLEX IN THE
UNITED STATES AND IN THE WORLD HAS INVITED AN
AUSTRALIAN EXHIBIT TO TOUR ITS CIRCUIT OF MUSEUMS.
WE SHAL. L ACCEPT THIS INVITATION, DRAWING FROM MANY
AUSTRAL: AN MUSEUMS MATERIAL RELATED TO AUSTRALIANAMERICAN
LINKS FROM OUR EARLIEST TIMES TO THE PRESENT DAY. 
THERE IS ONE OTHER PROPOSAL I HAVE TO
ANNCUNCE TONIGHT. AMERICANS HAVE MADE MANY
CONTR-SUTIONS TO AUSTRALIAN LIFE. NONE IS MORE
ENDURING OR STRIKING THAN THAT OF WALTER BURLEY
GRIFFIN. SINCE GRIFFIN'S DESIGN FOR CANBERRA WAS
SELECTED IN 1912, THE NATIONAL CAPITAL HAS BECOME
A MCNU-ENT TO HIS VISION AND ARCHITECTURAL SKILL
A GARBE-CITY. GRIFFIN MADE GREAT CONTRIBUTIONS TO
ARCHITECUJRE, LANDSCAPE AND TOWN PLANNING IN
OTHER PARTS OF AUSTRALIA. NOVEMBER 1976 WILL SEE THE
CENTENARY OF HIS BIRTH. THE GOVERNMENT INTENDS TO
HONOUR HIM WITH THE ERECTION OF A MEMORIAL IN CANBERRA.
g-N
THIS WILL ALSO COINCIDE WITH THE BICENTARY CELEBRATIONS.
A COMPETITION WILL BE HELD THIS YEAR TO CHOOSE A DESIGN
FOR THE MEMORIAL, THE MEMORIAL WILL BE SITED ON
THE SUMMIT CF MOUNT AINSLIE. I UNDERSTAND THAT THE
NATIONAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION WILL BE
GIVING FURTHER DETAILS OF THE. COMPETITION IN A
STATEMENT THIS EVENING. / 9 
I THANK PROFESSOR MANNING CLARK AND HIS
COMMIF.= E FOR THE TIME THEY HAVE SPENT AND THE WORK
THEY -A-E DONE IN PREPARING PROGRAMS FOR THE BICENTENARY
FESTIVAL. I THANK AMBASSADOR GREEN; MR ALLEN
MOYES, PRESIDENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION,
AN CF= ICER OF THE ORDER FOR AUSTRALIA FOR
" DISTINGUISHED SERVICE OF A HIGH DEGREE IN THE FIELDS
OF A-E-EMENT AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS";
MR CHARLES BERNARD, PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY; AND MR BROOKS WILSON, A VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION AND CHAIRMAN OF THE
AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN FESTIVAL 1976. I AM HAPPY THAT
THE AUSTRALIIAN' GOVERNMENT WILL BE CONTRIBUTING IN FULL
MEASURE TO AN OCCASION THAT WILL HONOUR THE NOBLEST
IDEALS IN T-E AMERICAN TRADITION AND DEVELOP FURTHER
THE INDISSCLUBLE FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN THE AMERICAN
AND AUSTRALIAN PEOPLES, 



SPEECH BY THE PRIfME MINISTER,
THE HON, E. G. WHITLAM, MP,
AT THE OPENING OF THE NEW PRINCIPAL OFFICE IN VICTORIA
OF THE COMOi'OWEALTHl BAINKING CORPORATION
MELBOURNE, 8 JULY 1975 ' 1a
* 1
IT IS A VERY GREAT HONOUR TO BE OPENING
THIS SPLENDID NEW BUILDING OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS IN
VICTORIA. I HAVE ALWAYS KNOWN THAT MELBOURNE WAS THE GREAT
FINANCIAL AND BANKING CAPITAL OF AUSTRALIA, AT LEAST
THAT'S WHAT THEY SAY IN MELBOURNE, AND AS YOU KNOW.
IN ANY SORT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTION I LIKE TO GET WITH
THE STRENGTH, OF COURSE MELBOURNE DOESN'T HAVE EVERYTHING
-HER OWN WAY BECAUSE THREE OF THE GREAT BANKS OF AUSTRALIA
INCLUDING THE BIGGEST AND THE OLDEST HAVE THEIR
HEADQUARTERS IN SYDNEY. NEVERTHELESS THERE ARE THREE
SOTHER BANKS WIjTH THEIR HEADQUARTERS IN MELBOURNE.
So THE SCORE IS PRACTICALLY EVEN. CERTAINLY
THIS EXCELLENT EDIFICE, THIS MOST IMPOSING AND GRACEFUL
STRUCTURE, WILL MARK A NEW CHAPTER IN THE LONG
AND SUCCESSFUL HISTORY OF THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS OF
AUSTRALIA, '' r 
2a
IT WAS HERE-IN COLLINS STREET, NOT FAR
FROM THIS SITE, THAT THE COMMONWEALTH BANK OPENED ITS
FIRST OFFICE INj 1912., THAT WAS THE BEGINNING OF A
MAGNIFICENT VENTURE, A SUPERB EXAMPLE OF COMPETITIVE
PUBLIC ENTERPRISE THAT HAS BROUGHT ENORMOUS BENEFITS
TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. A LABOR GOVERNMENT THE
GOVERNMENT LED BY* ANDREW FISHER -INTRODUCED THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK BILL IN NOVEMBER 1911. LET ME QUOTE SOME WORDS FROM
FISHER'S SPEECH: " A NATIONAL BANK IS A NECESSITY.* IT WILL
DO THE GOVERNMENT' S BUSINESS HERE AND IN,
LONDON-BETTER THAN ANY OTHER BANK COULD DO
IT. TIME AND EXPERIENCE WIL L SHOW HOW ITS
FUNCTIONS MAY BE EXTENDED. WE CAN REST
ASSURED THAT IF THIS PROPOSAL, WHICH IS NEW
IN MANY IMPORTANT FEATURES, IS A SUCCESS,
ALL PARTIES WILL ULTIMATELY LAY CLAIM
TO A SHARE OF THE HONOUR OF HAVING BROUGHT
IT INTO EXISTENCE. earn 
3.
FISHER SPOKE WIFH GREAT FORESIGHT OF THE
WAY fHE B A KS' FUNCTIONS COULD BE EXTENDED. CERTAINLY,
1' iIT1 Ox WITHOIJT THE ASSISTANCE OF GOVERNMENTS, THE
BANKS' ACTIVITIES HAVE EX" PANDED. IN 1949 THERE WERE
18 PRIVATE TRADING BANKS IN AUSTRALIA TODAY THERE
ARE 13, INCLUDING THE 7 MAJOR ONES. WHEN THE LIBERALS
CAME TO OFFICE THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS' TRADING BUSINESS
WAS ONE OF THE SMALLEST OF THE AUSTRALIAN BANKS;
WHEN THEY LEFT OFFICE IT WAS THE SECOND LARGEST. THE
SAVINGS BANK IS AUSTRALIA'S BIGGEST INSTITUTIONAL LENDER
FOR HOUSING, SINCE 1964 IT HAS ADVANCED MORE THAN
$ 2000 MILLION TO FINANCE HOMES FOR MORE THAN 300,000
AUSTRALIAN FAMILIES, LAST YEAR IT HAD MORE THAN
7 MILLION ACTIVE . ACCOUNTS WITH A TURNOVER IN TRANSACTIONS
OF MORE THAN $ 16,000 MILLION. THERE IS NO NEED FOR ME
TO WEARY YOU WITH LARGE FIGURES. YOU WILL HEAR ENOUGH
OF THEM TOMORROW. THE POINT IS SIMPLY THAT THE COMMONWEALTH
BANK HAS BECOME THE MOST POPULAR, THE MOST TRUSTED,
THE MOST GENEROUS OF ALL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN AUSTRALIA.
/ 4 
THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES IT IS TIME
TO DO NOW WHAT ANDREW FISHER ENVISAGED AND EXTEND THE BANK'S
FUNCTIONS TO NEW FIELDS. IT HAS ALWAYS BEEN THE
GOVERNMENT'S POLICY TO ' INCREASE THE COMPETITIVENESS OF
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION. THROUGHOUT ITS
0 HISTORY THE BANK HAS NOT BEEN PERMITTED TO ENTER THE
HIRE PURCHASE OR FINANCE FIELD. ITS COMPETITORS HAVE
o BEEN UNDER NO SUCH RESTRAINT. MANY OF THEM ESTABLISHED*
H IRE PURCHASE INTERESTS IN THE 1950' s. WE SHALL ALLOW
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKTT O JOIN THE PRIVATE TRADING BANKS
IN AFFORDING HIRE PURCHASE-SERVICES. THIS MATTER HAS BEEN
UNDER STUDY BY THE CORPORATION AND THE GOVERNMENT FOR
SOME TIME# THE GOVERNMENT AND THE BOARD OF THE
0CORPORATION HAVE NOW AGREED THAT COMMONWEALTH BANKS
SHOULD ESTABLISH A FINANCE COMPANY SUBSIDIARY TO BE
OWNED JOINTLY BY THE COMMONWEALTH SAVINGS BANK AND THE
COMMONWEALTH TRADING BANK. THE COMPANY WILL BE IN
OPERATION BEFORE THE END OF THE YEAR. I 
THE COMPANY WILL BE PROVIDING SERVICES
SIMILAR TO THOSE NORMALLY AVAILABLE FROM FINANCE
COMPANIES, INCLUDING HIRE PURCHASE, PERSONAL LOANS,
LEASE FINANCING AND COMMERCIAL LENDING. IT WILL ENABLE
THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS TO MATCH SERVICES PROVIDED BY
D OTHER BANKS THROUGH THEIR AFFILIATED FINANCE. COMPANIES
AND PROMOTE FURTHER COMPETITION IN THE BANKING AND
3FINANCE SECTORS1 SHOULD ADD THAT THE PROPOSED FINA NCE
COMPANY WILL HAVE NO ADVANTAGES IN RESPECT TO TAXATION
AND OPERATIONAL ASPECTS COMPARED WITH OTHER BANK-AFFILIATED
FINANCE COMPANIES, IT WILL COMPETE ON AN EQUAL BASIS.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMPANY SHOWS THE. GOVERNMENT'S
DETERMINATION THAT THE COMMONWEALTH BANKS SHOULD NOT BE AT
A DISADVANTAGE COMPARED WITH THE OTHER BANKS AND SHOULD
MATCH THE SERVICES OF OTHER BANKS. IT IS THE GOVERNMENT'S
O INTENTION THAT ALL BANK CUSTOMERS SHOULD RECEIVE ADEQUATE
AND COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES AT REASONABLE COST. THE
COMMONWEALTH BANKS PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE PROCESS,
IN THIS CONTEXT, I REMIND YOU OF THE COMMONWEALTH
BANKING CORPORATION'S ANNOUNCEMENT IN MAY THAT IT COULD
ENTER THE TRAVEL BUSINESS, ACQUIRE TRAVEL AGENCIES, AND
PROVIDE FULL TRAVEL SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH
AT OPENING OF NOW, COBURG, VICTORIA,*
11 JULY, 1975.
IN A WEEK MOMENTOUS IN THE HISTORY OF THIS
NATION,* A WEEK IN WHICH PARLIAMENT WAS RECALLED FOR A
SPECIAL SESSION, A WEEK IN WHICH THE OPPOSITION SHOWED
ITS FAMILIARITY WITH INTERNATIONAL F INANCE AND INTERSTATE
INTRIGUE IT IS APPROPRIATE TO COM~ E BACK TO EARTH TO THE
GRASS ROOTS LEVEL OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN THE STATE
WHERE I WAS BORN 59 YEARS AGO TODAY.
IWAS INVITED HERE BY A GREAT AUSTRALIAN, A GREAT
SERVANT OF AUSTRALIA, A GREAT FRIEND,. DR COOMBS, A. C.,
THE MAN ENTRUSTED WITH THE CONDUCT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION
INTO AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION WHICH MY GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHED JUST A YEAR AGO, ' I F I 
I IT IS WORTH REMEMBERING THAT FACT, BECAUSE IN ALL
THE WELTER OF WORDS ABOUT THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ITS
OBLIGATIONS IN RECENT WEEKS, FEW HAVE BOTHERED TO RECALL
THE FACT THAT THE ROYAL COMMISSION HAS BEEN CONTINUING
ITS INVESTIGATION INTO THE PUBLIC SERVICE AT ALL LEVELS
AND FROM ALL ANGLES, FOR A WHOLE YEAR. AND THAT FACT IS
TOO READILY FORGOTTEN BY OUR DETRACTORS. SURE, IT HAS
HAD A GOOD DEAL OF PUBLICITY AT TIMES, SUCH AS WHEN
PERMANENT HEADS HAVEPRESENTED SUBMISSIONS AND SPOKEN
TO THEM, BUT NOT NEARLY SO MUCH WHEN ORDINARY MORTALS
HAVE BOTHERED TO PRESENT THEIR VIEWS.
IT IS, HOWEVER, TO THE VERY REAL CREDIT OF THIS
ROYAL COMMISSION, UNDER DR COOMBS, THAT ITS OFFICERS HAVE
DELIBERATELY SOUGHT OUT AND ENCOURAGED PEOPLE ON THE
RECEIVING END OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE TO COMMENT ON THE
QUALITY AND COMPETENCE OF. THAT SERVICE AT THE POINT WHERE
* D IT REACHES THE PUBLIC,
THAT, OF COURSE, IS WHERE NOW COMES IN, BECAUSE IT
IS THE CREATION, THE BRAINCHILD, OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION,
AND A VERY PARTICULAR EXTENSION OF ITS RESEARCH PROGRAM.
IT IS AN ATTEMPT TO SEE HOW MUCH BETTER SERVED PEOPLE COULD
BE, GIVEN A MORE FLEXIBLE, IMAGINATIVE APPROACH TO THEIR
NEEDS AS CONSUMERS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE PRODUCT. ITS A
SWING AWAY FROM THE SPECIALIST BOUTIQUE, AND BACK TO THE
ANYTHING AND EVERYTHING STORES OF AUSTRALIA'S CHILDHOOD
COUNTRY TOWNS. i as /. 3 
3,
THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
ADMINISTRATION TO USE ITS FORMAL T ITLE HAS BEEN TOLD
REPEATEDLY, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA, THAT THE DELIVERY OF
WELFARE SERVICES, ALL OVER AUSTRALIA, IS CONFUSED AND
CONFUSING. IT IS A SAD COMMENT ON THE WAY THINGS HAVE
DEVELOPED IN OUR SOCIETY-THAT THOSE VERY SERVICES DESIGNED
TO HELP PEOPLE FREQUENTLY ADD TO THEIR SENSE OF BEWILDERMENT
AND ALIENATION AT THE VERY TIME WHEN THEY NEED THE MOST
SUPPORT. EVEN AT. THE BEST OF TIMES,_ PEOPLE OFT . EN HAVE
DIFFICULTY KNOWING WHICH LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT, LET ALONE
WHICH DEPARTM'ENT, OR WHICH SECTION OF WHICH DEPARTMENT,-.
CAN HELP THEM. AND IT'S ALL VERY WELL SAYING THAT YOU CAN LOOK
IT UP IN A PHONEBOOK, BECAUSE -QUITE APART FROM. WHETHER
YOU CAN READ ENGLISH TO START WITH -, IT'S ANYONE'S GUESS
WHERE YOU MIGHT FIND A PARTICULAR SERVICE LISTED.
SO, NO0W I S AN EXPERIMENT DEVISED BY THE ROYAL
COMMISSION OFFICERS TO SEE WHETHER LOCATING* AUSTRALIAN,
STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND VOLUNTARY WELFARE AGENCIES
IN THE ONE PLACE WILL HELP PEOPLE TO. FIND THE PARTICULAR
SERVICE THEY NEED, s es/ 
NOIS ALSO AN EXPERIMENT IN WORKER PARTICIPATION
IN THE SENSE THAT IT WILL GIVE OFFICERS OF THESE VARIOUS
ORGANISATIONS THE OPPORTUNITY TO WORK TOGETHER ON WORKING
OUT HOW TO IMPROVE THE SERVICE THEY GIVE THE PUBLIC.
AT A TIME WHEN MORE PUBLICITY IS GIVEN TO THOSE
THINGS WHICH DIVIDE THAN THOSE THINGS WHICH UNITE BRANCHES
OF GOVERNMENT IN THIS COUNTRY, IT IS REFRESHING AND
COMMENDABLE THAT THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT HAS AGREED TO
JOIN THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN CONDUCTING A TRIAL RUN
OF THE NOW SHOP FOR A TWO YEAR PERIOD. DURING THIS TIME
THE EXPERIEMNT WILL BE EVALUATED FROM THE POINT OF VIEW
OF THE-PEOPLE WHO USE ITS SERVICES AS WELL AS THE PUBLIC
SERVANTS WORKING-IN THE SHOP,
INITIALLY THE NOW SHOP WILL INVOLVE OVER TWENTY
PEOPLE IN EITHER FULL OR PART-TIME POSITIONS, AND IT WILL
BE OF PARTICULAR BENEFIT TO THOSE WHO LIVE AND WORK IN THE
NORTH WEST REGION -THAT is. BRUNSWICK. COBURG, FAWKNER AND
CAMPBELLFI ELD1 
THERE WILL BE TEN STAFF MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT
r
OF SOCIAL WELFARE TWO SIMILAR DEPARTMENTS WHOSE SHORTENED
NAMES, " SECURITY" AND " WELFARE", ARE EASY FOR THE BUREAUCRATS
TO DISTINGUISH, BUT IT'S A DISTINCTION THAT MANY PEOPLE MAY
NOT READILY APPRECIATE$
NOW AT COBURG WILL RECEIVE APPLICATIONS FOR
PENSIONS AND BENEFITS, ADVISE ON ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSIONS
AND BENEFITS AND FORWARD APPLICATIONS RECEIVED TO STATE
HEADQUARTERS FOR PROCESSING AND PAYMENT. A SOCIAL WORKER
WILL BE STATIONED IN THE OFFICE AND WILL UNDERTAKE SOME
CASE WORK ACTIVITIES AS WELL AS LIAISE WITH OTHER WELFARE
BODIES WITHIN THE COBURG/ BRUNSWICK AREA TO HELP PLAN AND
IMPLEMENT COMMUNITY WELFARE PROGRAMS, A FULL INFORMATION
SERVICE ON SOCIAL SECURITY MATTERS WILL BE PROVIDED IN AN
EFFORT TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE IN THE AREA BECOME PROPERLY
AWARE OF WHAT ASSISTANCE THEY CAN EXPECT THROUGH THE
AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY, NOW REALLY WILL
BE A ONE-STOP-SHOP,
THE NORTH WEST REGIONAL COUNCIL-FOR SOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT HAS BROUGHT TOGETHER VOLUNTARY AGENCIES IN THE
NORTH WEST AREA TO WORK IN WITH NOW, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS
ALSO BEING INVOLVED THROUGH THE REGIONAL ORGANISATION OF
COUNCILS, / 6 
61
SO, IN A VERY REAL SENSE, NOW WILL BE A ONE-STOP-SHOP
WITH NOT ONLY AN ABUNDANCE OF CUSTOMERS, BUT ALSO AN EXISTING
AND DEVELOPING GOODWILL.*
IT IS, AFTER ALL, A PARTICULAR KIND OF GOOD-NATUR ED
TAKEOVER OF SOMETHING THAT DIDN IT REALLY EXIST BEFORE, IT
REPRESENTS A MERGING OF TALENT/ A BURYING OF REAL AND IMAGINED
RIVALRIES, AND A GREAT CHALLENGE TO ALL THOSE WHO WILL HAVE
THE HEADACHE AND HEARTACHE OF MAKING IT WORK, BELIEVE IT
CAN BE MADE TO WORK$' I HOPE IT DOES.
NOW IS THE HOUR. IT'S TIME TO CUT THE RED TAPE, 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT OPENING OF ST, FRANCIS
XAVIER PRIMARY SCHOOL, LURNEA, N. S. W, ON 13 JULY 1975.
AFTER THE TURMOIL OF CANBERRA, IT IS CURIOUSLY
REFRESHING TO COME HOME TO MY OWN ELECTORATE, TO WERRIWA, FOR
FRIDAY AND SATURDAY NIGHT AND SUNDAY AFTERNOON. I HAVE BEEN
IN EXCELLENT COMPANY ALL WEEKEND, AS SOME OF YOU MAY KNOW.
LAST NIGHT WAS THE ALL SAINTS PARISH BALL AND I HAD
THE PLEASURE OF SEEING His LORDSHIP BISHOP CREMIN AGAIN. W'
LAST MET AT THE BLESSING AND OPENING OF ST. BEDE'S HOME AT
HURSTVILLE, WHERE HE TOLD A VERY LONG AND COMPLICATED JOKE WHICH
SUBSEQUENTLY GOT RECORDED IN MY WIFE'IS MAGAZINE COLUMN.-IN
WOMAN'S DAY.' TAT MORE THAN MY JOKES DO.
TODAY, OF COURSE, His EMINENCE CARDINAL FREEMAN IS
HERE TO GIVE HIS BLESSING TO THE OPENING OF YET ANOTHER CATHOLIC
PRIMARY SCHOOL. WE LAST MET ON THE OCCASION OF THE BLESSING AND
OPENING OF ST. JOSEPH'S, MOOREBANK. I REMEMBER WE TRADED
OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE TWO THOMAS MOORES THE ONE WHO ENDOWED
A PROTESTANT THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE IN SYDNEY AND AFTER WHOM
MOOREBANK IS NAMED, AND THE OTHER GREAT ENGLISHMAN, ST, THOMAS MOORE,
AFTER WHOM SO MANY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS IN THIS COUNTRY ARE NAMED. 
2.
OPENING DAYS ARE ALWAYS A SOURCE OF IMMENSE
SATISFACTION TO THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN PLANNING
AND FUNDRAISING TO GET A PARTICULAR PROJECT, LITERALLY, ItOFF
THE GROUND" TODAY IS NO EXCEPTION: IAM ALWAYS DELIGHTED TO BE
ASSOCIATED WITH SUCH CEREMONIES, PARTICULARLY WHEN, IN THE CASE
OF SCHOOLS, IT MEANS THAT A NEW SCHOOL HAS BEEN CREATED IN A
RAPIDLY DEVELOPING OUTER SUBURBAN* AREA, WITH A CLEAR NEED FOR
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES TO CATER FOR THE HIGH PROPORTION OF.
SCHOOL-AGE AND YOUNGER CHILDREN. IT HAS BEEN THE CONSISTENT
BELIEF OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT THAT ALL CHILDREN
ARE ENTITLED TO EVERY POSSIBLE CHANCE OF A GOOD EDUCATION, NO
MATTER WHERE THEY LIV E IN AUSTRALIA. I B EL IEVE THAT WHAT WE
HAVE DONE FOR EDUCATION IN THIS COUNTRY WILL BE REMEMBERED WITH
GRATITUDE IN YEARS TO COME.
TIME WAS, AND NOT EVEN TWENTY YEARS AGO, WHEN IT WOULD
HAVE BEEN QUITE UNTHINKABLE FOR A PERSON OF MY POLITICS TO BE
ASKED TO DECLARE OPEN A CATHOLIC SCHOOL. AND YET, HERE WE ARE,-
CARDINAL FREEMAN AND I, -AT OUR SECOND CATHOLIC PRIMARY SCHOOL
OPENING IN THIS WERRIWA ELECTORATE IN THREE MONTHS. IT IS JUST
THREE MONTHS TO THE DAY APRIL 13-THAT ST. JOSEPH'S WAS
OPENED. AND NOW ST. FRANCIS XAVIER'S. 
BOTH TII; l CATIIOLIC PRIMARY SCHOOLS HAVE
ATTRACTED IDENI It,\ l A/ I\ TRALIAN GOVERNMENT GRANTS OF $ 140,000
UNDER THE CAP IAI ill IOR SCHOOLS PROGRAM 1973-74. THEY CAN
BE SEEN AS PART t~ uI; AUiSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S VASTLY
. IINNCCRREEAASSEEDD EEXXPPEENNIIgn11,1,, 1 ON EDUCATION OF ALL KINDS AND AT ALL
LEVELS. THREE Yt Al: i TIIE AMOUNT OF MONEY BEING SPENT
BY THE FEDERAL ( 1VII) I IJMENT ON CATHOLIC EDUCATION THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA WAS BIAllly $ 30 MILLION, THIS YEAR IT IS THREE
AND A HALF TIME:, MUCH. IT IS OVER $ 100 MILLION. NOW
THAT IS VERY MlI,' 1 FilUI THAN WOULD BE REQUIRED BY AN INCREASE
IN ENROLMENT OR AN INCREASE IN INFLATION IN THAT PERIOD,
THE PRINCIII II THAT WE HAVE ADHERED TO THROUGHOUT,
AS I SAID BEFORI, I I IAT IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE FOR CHILDREN
WHEREVER THEY LIVI WHATEVER THEIR PARENT'S MEANS, WHATEVER
THEIR PARENTS 1l:-II:; 11, WHATEVER THEIR PARENTS OCCUPATION
TO HAVE AS GOOD AN I IJCATION AS THIS COUNTRY CAN PROVIDE. 
AND THE BASIS UPON WHICH WE MAKE THAT PROVISION
IS PERFECTLY OPEN; IT'fS UNDER AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT. IT
IS ADMINISTERED BY A COMMISSION WHOSE MEMBERSHIP IS
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE DAY. IHAVE NEVER
HEARD ANY CRITICISM OF THE PEOPLE, MEN AND WOMEN, BOTH
LAY AND RELIGIOUS, WHO HAVE BEEN APPOINTED TO THAT
COMMISSION. IT IS A VERY DILIGENT COMMISSION, WITH A
VERY SERIOUS JOB TO DO. ITS RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 1974 AND
1975 HAVE TRANSFORMED EDUCATION IN AUSTRALIA AND I WOULD
BE ABLE TO SAY7THAT IF I WENT TO ANY STATE SCHOOL, IF I
WENT TO ANY CATHOLIC SCHOOL, OR IF I WENT. TO ANY
NON-GOVERNMENT, NON-CATHOLIC SCHOOL, ANYWHERE IN AUSTRALIA.
THREE YEARS AGO, HAD ICLAIMED THAT IWOULD BE ABLE
TO SAY THAT IN THE FUTURE, THERE MIGHT WELL HAVE BEEN A VERY
GREAT NUMBER OF DOUBTING-THOMASES AMONG YOU. WHAT I SAID
MIGHT HAVE BEEN RECEIVED WITH SCEPTICISM, IF NOT DISBELIEF.
IBELIEVE THAT THIS AUDIENCE -SO MUCH INVOLVED IN
THE PROFESSION OF TEACHING, SO MUCH CONCERNED ABOUT THE
QUALITY OF EDUCATION, AND SO MUCH AWARE OF THE NEEDS OF THE
YOUNG POPULATION IN OUR BURGEONING OUTER SUBURBS -KNOWS
HOW MUCH WE. HAVE TRIED TO DO IN THE EDUCATIONAL SPHERE, AND
HOW REAL ARE OUR INTENTIONS TO CONTINUE OUR POLICIES IN THIS
AREA. 
I HAVE VERY GREAT PLEASURE : i DECLARING OPEN
ST. FRANCIS XAVIER SCHOOL. 
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON CATHOLIC EDUCATION
IN WERRIWA
SACRED HEART, CABRAMATTA
GENERAL BUILDING GRANT
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) $ 200,000 45,564 3,937 6,000 5,770
11,948 ALLOCATED ( 1974)
( APPROVED TO
APRIL 1975)
( a ST. THRS'S, SADLIER-MILLEN
RECURRENT GRANT 197LV
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) ,30,770 1,697 2,000 7,520
12 242
OUR LADY OF MIT. CARMEL, MIT. PR'ITCHARD
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT
CAPITAL GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED)
RECURRENT GRANT ( DISADVANTAGED) ( 1974)
( APPROVED TO
APRIL 1975)
40,446 3,500
20,000 3,000 ( 1974)
9,120
A SPECIAL POINT OF INTEREST IS THE EXPENDITURE OF $ 9,000 ( INCLUDED
WITHIN THE ABOVE-FIGURES) ON A REMEDIAL READING TEACHER BEING SHARED
BY THE THREE SCHOOLS. ALL THREE. HAVE A HIGH PROPORTION OF PUPILS
WITH SEVERE READING DIFFICULTIES. 
HIGH SCHOOLS
PATRICIAN BROTHERS HIGH SCHOOL, LIVERPOOL
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
1ST PAYMENT 1975
LIBRARY BOOK GRANT $ 104,335 88,741 2,625
ST. MARY'S HIGH SCHOOL, LIVERPOOL
RECURRENT GRANT 1974
1ST PAYMENT 1975 88,552 74,880
GRANTS TO NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
YEARAUSTRALIA 1970/ 71 32,508,000
1971/ 72 36,236,000
1972/ 73 47,755,000
1973/ 74 70,163,000
1974/ 75 ( ESTIMATE) $ 127,5331/" o INCREASE 11,4% 31.7% 46.9% 81.7% N. S. W,
$ 12,136,000
$ 13,234,000
$ 17,277,000
$ 24,564,000
$ 45,206,000 
S
CHILDHOOD SERVICES PROGRAM4
ELECTORATE OF WERRIWA
1973/ 74 1974/ 75
( 1/ 1/ 74 to ( 1/ 7/ 74 to
Iocation 30/ 6/ 74) 31/ 3/ 75)
*.., Ition to salary costs,
in pre-school centres.
_,, Orthy Pre-Schoo, Holsworthy 2,747 4,572
. c Village Pre-School, Holsworthy 2,031 3,312
,... leburn Pre-School Kindergarten 1,656 4,622
: 3jbi Kindergarten, Ingleburn 993 1,563
jreen Valley Pre-School, Miller 6,170 12,966
Liverpool Pre-School Centre,
Liverpool 4,755 7,875
Ashcroft Pre-School Kindergarten 2,674 4,668
2. Contribution to salary costs, staff
S in child care centres. 1972/ 73 1973/ 74 1974/ 75
Ingleburn Child Care Centre,
( Methodist Church) 365 4,424 3,955
Ashcroft Child Care Centre,
S( Methodist Church) 3,639 4,329
3. Before and After School Proaram
( Approved 5/ 3/ 75 under Childhood
Services Program)
Heckenberg Primary School
equipment costs 2,370
4. Child Care Centres Capital Cost
( Approved under Child Care Act)
Child Care Centre for 40 children
aged 3-5 years Ingleburn 57,000
( Methodist Church), completed
operational
Child Care Centre for 53 children
aged 0-5 years Liverpool 200,000
( Lutheran Church)-( approval in
principle awaiting preparation
of building plans)
Child Care Centre for 40 children
aged 3-5 years Macouarie Fields 180,000
( Salvation Army, plans being
prepared). N. S. W. Education Dept.
Pre-School Centres Capital Cost,
Approved in 1973/ 74 Interim Pre-School
Child Care Services Program. / 2 
-2-
Double Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Busby West
Public School 38,555
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Sadleir
Public School 46,695
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Canley Heights
Public School 36,960
Single Unit Pre-School
( conversion) Lurnea
Public School 44,435
A number of other proposals are now being
considered. 



I lr Speech by the -Prime Minister at Opening of
. Ipswich, C ivic Hall.,. July. 19 75
Mr Mayor., Madam Mayoress, Treasurer, Mrs Hayden, Ministers
Mrs Campbell, Mrs Edwards, Senator and Mrs Bonner,
Mr Marginson, Mrs Marginson, Mr Hales, M. L. A.
Mrs Hales, Civic Fathers and Citizens.
Now this is the formal opening that I am about to perform. I
did the symbolic opening two hours ago at dusk in the presence
of hundreds and hundreds of the rising generation. And I believe
that symbolises what this occasion means for this city. Because
there were representatives, it seemed to me) of all possible
youth groups in the city and round about there gathered to
watch me unveil the plaque commemorating the opening of the
Civic Hall. The first instalment of the great new civic centre
which will embellish and exalt the heart of this ancient citythe
oldest free city, I'm always told, in Queensland.
Because all the people who were watching there for the rest of
their lives will remember this day, what it means to them. This
Civic Hall provides facilities for a great range of activities.
That the whole of civic centre contains two whole city blocks,
we will be the heart of all the activities which a modern city,
a complete community should provide. And which the rising
generation expects.
Now in this auditorium where I am speaking now there are many
many hundreds of citizens. In the intervening two hours the
Mayor and Mayoress entertained many of us in the lower ground
floor. There are three rooms there, the Cunningham room, the
Logan room and the Lockyer room. We were in the Cunningham room,
the largest and we were very well entertained and replenished and
fortified and prepared. The civic fathers did us very well
indeed and we who were in the Cunningham room are grateful to
them. I thought probably the Cunningham room was the most suitable
place to entertain us in the intervening two hours, not only
because of its size but because of its association, the fact
that Alan Cunningham discovered the place. It mightn't have been
appropriate to have the meeting in the Logan room because that,
of course, is named after the Commandant of the Penal Settlementthe
original foundation in this State. I wouldn't have minded
the Lockyer room because Lockyer was a very great man and one
of those whom I have always aspired to follow. His son was
a very great man, a member of the old Interstate Commission,
the original Interstate Commission, and he was born when the
Lockyer who's remembered round here, was 71 years of age.
So, of course, -we in Public life always regard Lockyer
as a proper example to follow. 
1" 2.
Now this occasion is the third that my wife and I have been
here last year and this. My wife was here early last year
just after the floods. I was here late in the year, some
people said just before the deluge But we've come together
on this occasion, the date was ar . ranged between the Mayor and
me through the intervention of Bill Hayden, who is, I'm
certain , about to 6 ffect a successful transition from the most
enlightened and benevolent Minister for Social Security the
country has ever had to the greatest of Australian Treasurers.
But you know, and I can never forget, he is also the M. P. for
Oxley. And he deliberately arranged, I'm certain, for this'
opening to coincide with the weekend immediately before we
consider the Budget. Because I believe he wanted to bring
home to me the demonstration of what the Australian Government
should be doing because in Ipswich we can very easily see in
many ways what it can do in respect to local government and
civic and community facilities..
A few years ago it would have been remarkable to ask a Prime
Minister to open any Municipal civic facility . such as this.
In fact, I receive a remarkable number of such invitations
these days from Cairns to here, over the border to Murwillumbah
and so on. And I think it is because my Government is the first
Australian Government which has accepted a responsibility in
respect to local government. And-the Mayor has already mentioned
some of them. I think next Tuesday we start clearing the site
for the Humanities Building $ 800,000 part of the Regional
Employment Development Scheme. But last year, last financial
year, for the first time the Australian Government asked the
Australian Parliament to make provision for grants to local
governments. And it did so on advice of an expert impartial
body, the Grants Commission, and Ipswich got about $ 360,000 to
spend as it wished. Brisbane got more, $ 2 million, more than
any place in Australia. But you've got more than most.
And then I recall that last financial year there was $ 840,000
provided for the National Sewerage Program for Ipswich;
$ 200,000 for Child Minding Centres; another $ 800,000 for
Regional Employment Development; there is going to be a
$ 1 million office block; and then there is going to be a
Queensland Government Office Block which means that in these
two blocks citizens will be able to have all facilities
provided by local government, State government, Federal
government handy to each other. Very puzzling for citizens
to know where they can get assistance or advice from elected
representatives. It will' be easier than most places to find out
and to get the assistance and advice in Ipswich because they
will all be adjacent to each other in proper buildings. The
staff will be servicing their fellow citizens in a convenient
spot and decent building.
Then I should mention Community Health Centre in East Street
and the Australian Legal Aid Office. In*, all these respects
I think can be seen, that there hare been initiatives which
mean that if citizens want professional advice, medical or
legal, if they want Governmental advice, if they need
municipal facilities, public facilities, then they are on the
way to being provided. / 3 
V6 3.
It's a very happy moment, indeed, for me to come to Ipswich
first, so that one can see these things properly arranged
side by side, planned ahead. This is the largest building
erected in Ipswich for very many years. In the heart of the
city there are other buildings to follow. A whole range of
facilities which we can't provide as individuals or as
families will now be provided through proper cooperation, local,
State and Federal, in the heart of this old city, this city
which from now on will have as modern and appropriate facilities
as any city in Australia.
Thank you very much indeed for asking my wife and me to be with
you on this opening night. We are enjoying ourselves immensely.
And looking at all the people as we come in, I'm certain we can
be proud to think that as ratepayers, as taxpayers, as electorate
persons, as citizens, we are building well for the future of
this regional centre, this great provincial city, this oldest
free city in Queensland. And as I come into your airport,
Amberley itself, to go back tonight to Canberra, I realise how
easy it is to get here, how pleasant it is and when you're here
how hospitable the place is.
Mr Mayor, Madam Mayoress thank you very much for your invitation
on behalf of your fellow citizens to me and my wife to come
here at the inauguration of the Ipswich Civic Centre and in
particular to the opening of the Ipswich Civic Hall. I wish
well to everybody who comes to this auditorium, everybody who
partakes of the hospitality in the lower ground floor; all the
people who come to the seminars, the exhibitions, that will be
held week in, week out, in this great building the Centre of
Ipswich, the revived exalted part of this city.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now declare officially open the Ipswich
Civic Hall. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
AT THE OPENING OF BLAKENEY LODGE, TUMUT, 26 JULY 1975
IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE TO RETURN TO
TUMUT WITH MY WIFE TO SHARE JN THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF
BLAKENEY LODGE. WE HAVE BEEN HAPPY TO BE PRESENT AT
THE OPENING OF A NUMBER OF OLD PEOPLE'S HOMES IN NEW
SSOUTH WALES IN THE PAST FEW WEEKS. IN FACT, THIS IS
OUR THIRD IN JUST TWO MONTHS ST. BEDE'S AT HURSTVILLE
WITH BISHOP CREMIN, OZANAM VILLA IN LISMORE WITH
O BISHOP SATTERTHWAITE AND NOW THE MOST BEAUTIFUL, AND
THE EASIEST TO PRONOUNCE, BLAKENEY LODGE, TUMUT, WITH
ARCHBISHOP CAHILL,
THE LAST TIME ARCHBISHOP CAHILL AND I SHARED
SUCH AN OCCASION WAS ON ST. VALENTINE'S DAY LAST YEAR
SWHEN OZANAM HOUSE IN CANBERRA WAS OPENED, I BELIEVE IT'
IS A TRIBUTE TO HIS AWARENESS OF THE NEED FOR SUCH
ACCOMMODATION THAT TWO SUCH HOSTELS HAVE BEEN BUILT
IN HIS DIOCESE IN LESS THAN 18 MONTHS. I REALIZE,
OF COURSE, THAT THE PARISH PRIEST OF TUMUT, FATHER TIERNAN,
HAS HAD MORE THAN A LITTLE TO DO WITH GETTING BLAKENEY
LODGE LITERALLY OFF THE GROUND: PARISH PRIESTS ARE EXPECTED
TO DEVELOP SUCH TALENTS EARLY IN THEIR CAREERS, BUT
FATHER TIERNAN WAS FOLLOWING IN ILLUSTRIOUS FOOTSTEPS,
NONE OTHER THAN THOSE OF THE LATE MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY
AFTER WHOM THE LODGE WAS NAMED, 
-2-
I MUST SAY 7-AT, IN ITS SHORTENED FORM, THE LODGE, IT BEARS
A REMARKABLE RESEMBLANCE TO MY OWN ADDRESS IN CANBERRA,
AND IT'S SOBERING TO THINK THAT THAT ADDRESS COULD SO EASILY
HAVE BEEN THE LODGE, TUMUT, HAD THAT FATEFUL VOTE ON
THE SITING OF THE FEDERAL CAPITAL GONE DIFFERENTLY BACK
IN 1908. SiJT TO RETURN TO MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY WHO WAS BORN
IN TUMUT A YEAR BEFORE THAT VOTE WAS TAKEN, WHICH EXEMPTS HIM
FROM ALL BLAME IT WAS HE WHO REALISED THE NEED FOR
ACCOMMODATION HERE IN HIS HOME TOWN, AND APPROACHED HIS
ARCHBISHOP ON THE MATTER, OFFERING AT THE SAME TIME TO PROVIDE
LAND NEXT TO HIS CHURCH, FREE OF CHARGE IN CASE HIS
LoRDs-iTP REQUIRED ANY ADDITIONAL ENCOURAGEMENT,
T*-E .3T iS HISTORY, BUT VERY MUCH A COMMUNITY
HISTORY, SINCE = Cœ CTS LIKE THIS, NATURALLY AND PROPERLY,
BECOME THE CWCE= CN THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, A CONCERN THAT
THE USTRAL :-EMENT IS ANXIOUS TO SEE MAINTAINED.
IT DOES NO: AS OUR OPPONENTS ASSERT, THAT BECAUSE
WE PROVIDE FOORS SOCIAL WELFARE ACTIVITIES LIKE HOUSING
FOR THE AGED. HAT THEREFORE WE SEEK CONTROL OF SUCH
PROGRAMS. IoC. hING COULD BE FURTHER FROM THE TRUTH. IT IS
IN FACT AN M= CRTANT ELEMENT IN ALL THE SOCIAL AND
COMMUNITY PRCGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT THAT LOCAL
COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND INVOLVEMENT SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED,
PARTICULARLY IN THOSE PROGRAMS DESIGNED TO HELP PEOPLE. o,/ 3 
I E. LIEVE THAT ALL THOSE INVOLVED IN CATHOLIC CARE
FOR THE AGED, WHO HAVE HAD THE OVERALL RESPONSIBILITY IN
NEW SOUTH WALES FOR CO-OPERATING WITH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS IN THE FIELD OF HOUSING FOR THE AGED, WOULD
TESTIFY TO THIS,
, EE IN TUMUT, FOR INSTANCE, FOLLOWING THE
FORMATION C' A ANAGEMENT COMMITTEE, A PUBLIC MEETING WAS
CALLED SO THAT ANYONE IN TUMUT WHO WANTED TO GET INVOLVED
IN THE BLAKENEY LODGE PROJECT COULD DO JUST THAT. AND THAT
HIGH LEVEL OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT WILL CONTINUE BECAUSE
ITS NOT ALL OVER YET. SURE, MY GOVERNMENT HAS GLADLY
PROVIDED $ 312,000 FOR BLAKENEY LODGE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS
5osE-3s ACT E ICREASED THE SUBSIDY FROM $ 2 TO $ 1
UP T-S FOC LATE LAST YEAR BUT THE PEOPLE OF TUMUT
HAVE RAISED 3 , GOO THROUGH SHEER HARDWORK AND GOODWILL.
ALL T-E OLD SE=-: E =? SANISATIONS, APEX, ROTARY, LIONS,
AND NE ONES, : C '-AY INDIVIDUALS HAVE MADE IT THEIR
. SU.:-SS TO -E I EVEN NOTICED WEIGHT WATCHERS
COMING TO ON THE FRONT PAGE OF LAST WEEK'S NEWSPAPER,
AND IT IS -ANT THAT THIS LEVEL OF COMMUNITY CARING
SHOULD CONT:_--E LONG AFTER THE BALANCE SHEETS ARE ACCEPTABLE
TO FATHER T: E. AN AND BISHOP CAHILL, I KNOW THEY WILL
AGREE THAT ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT THAT PLACES LIKE
BLAKENEY LGE SHOULD TAKE ROOT IN THE COMMUNITY AND BECOME
ACCEPTED AS ANOTHER COMPONENT OF THE TOTAL LIFE OF THE
COMMUNITY, NOT IN ANY WAY CUT OFF OR REMOTE. 
-4-
IT IS IMPORTANT THAT THE PEOPLE WHO COME TO LIVE
HERE IN BLAKENEY LODGE SHOULD RECOGNISE THIS TOO, BECAUSE
THAT FACT MAY HELP THEM TO REALISE THAT ALTHOUGH IT
REPRESENTS A NEW BEGINNING FOR THEM, AND FOR THEIR FAMILIES
AND FRIENDS, IT'S REALLY JUST AN EXTENSION OF THE LIFE
THEY HAVE BEEN LEADING, ALBEIT IN NEW SURROUNDINGS, BUT
THOSE SURROUNDINGS ARE SO WELCOMING AND COMFORTABLE THAT THE
O TRANSITION SHOULDN'T BE TOO DIFFICULT.
OBVIOUSLY MOST RESIDENTS WILL BE COMING TO
O BLAKENiEY LODGE FROM AROUND TUMUT, BUT I EXPECT THAT OTHERS
WHO MAY HAVE DRIFTED AWAY OVER THE YEARS WILL HAVE A
YEARNING TO COME BACK, TO COME HOME TO TUMUT AS THEY GET
OLDER AND TIRE OF THE RAT RACE AWAY FROM THE
EXTRAORDINARY BEAUTY OF TUMUT, I HAVE A FEELING THAT MANY
OLD FRIENDSHIPS WILL BE RENEWED HERE, AND THAT MANY PEOPLE
WHO COME HERE iLL L: TERALLY TAKE ON A NEW LEASE OF LIFE
-I T-= IR NEW iDENT COMFORT, THEIR NEW COMFORTABLE
:œ: ENDENCE, I AA LOOKING FORWARD VERY MUCH INDEED TO MEETING
A NUMBER OF THE FIRST RESIDENTS TO BE OF BLAKENEY LODGE,
ALL BORN BEFORE THAT FEDERAL CAPITAL VOTE WAS TAKEN, ALL
BORN BEFORE FEDERATION, FOR THAT MATTER. THERE'S MISS CHRISTINE
McGREGOR AND MR TED CURLL, WHOSE AGES ADD UP TO ABOUT 168
I CAN'T BE MORE SPECIFIC WITHOUT BEING ACCUSED OF LACKING
IN GALLANTRY AND WHO WERE EACH CONNECTED WITH OLD
PIONEERING FAMILIES. AND THERE IS MRS ELSIE WILLIAMS WHO, BY
VIRTUE OF HER LONG SERVICE, IS DOUBTLESS VERY MUCH MORE
FAMILIAR WITH THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S RESIDENCE, YARRALUMLA, THAN I AM.
e. 
I EXPECT YOU ALL KNOW MY FASCINATION FOR AUSTRALIAN HISTORY. I
AM QUITE SURE THAT A LITTLE LATER ON I WILL LEARN A GREAT
DEAL OF HISTORY THAT HASN'T YET FOUND ITS WAY INTO THE
TEXTBOOKS. I AM ONLY SAD THAT MONSIGNOR BLAKENEY HIMSELF
CAN'T BE WITH US TO SHARE THE REMINISENCES ON THIS GREAT
OCCASION. AS THE TUMUT AND ADELONG TIMES NOTED IN
JANUARY LAST YEAR: " HE WAS A GREAT SON OF TUMUT, A PRODUCT
OF THE LOCAL CONVENT SCHOOL AND THE TOWN AND PROVED A
0 WORTHY SON OF HIS LOCALLY BORN MOTHER AND FATHER, HIS
VERY PRESENCE DIGNIFIED ANY GATHERING AND HIS PERSONALITY
LENT GRACE TO ALL PUBLIC FUNCTIONS HE ATTENDED IN AN
OFFCIAL CAPACITY. -E WON THE ADMIRATION AND RESPECT
OF ALL THOSE WHO SAW HIM GROW FROM BOYHOOD TO THE HIGH
OFFICE OF j'ONSINCR.
IT NG THAT HIS NAME SHOULD BE REMEMBERED
S -EE THE -E LOVED AND THROUGH THE PROJECT THAT
WAS SO DEAR T3 HIS -EART. I HAVE MUCH PLEASURE IN
: ECLARING OPEN BLAKENEY LODGE. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR PRIME 1MINISTER FOR CIVIC RECEPTIOIN, TUMUT,
26 JULY 1975
1, I AM DELIGHTED TO BE HERE TODAY WITH MY WIFE TO
SHARE THE WARMTH AND HOSPITALITY OF TUMUT SHIRE. IT SEEMS
LIKE YESTERDAY THAT WE WERE IN THE AREA TO HELP CELEBRATE
THE TUMUT AND DISTRICT SESQUI-CENTENARY'WHICH EVERYONE
ENJOYED SO MUCH.
SON THE WAY DOWN FROM CANBERRA THIS MORNING I HAD
ANOTHER LOOK AT THE SPECIAL SOUVENIR PROGRAM WHICH WAS
PREPARED LAST YEAR FOR THOSE 150 ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS,
AND IT CONTAINS QUITE FASCINATING INFORMATION ON THE EARLY
YEARS OF SETTLEMENT HERE, ESPECIALLY ON THE PIONEERING
FAMILIES WHOSE TIRELESS EFFORTS FULFILLED THE VISION OF
0 HUME AND HOVELL.
S 2. I WAS ESPECIALLY PLEASED TO READ THE ARTICLE BY
MY OLD AND VERY DEAR FRIEND, THE LATE FRANK GREEN, ON THE
S ORIGINAL BATTLE FOR CANBERRA. MORE THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN
AUSTRALIA, TUMUT FELL AN EARLY VICTIM-TO SENATE OBSTRUCTION.
BUT IT TOOK TIME, AS SENATE OBSTRUCTION ALWAYS DOES. IN
THESE HEADY DAYS OF ENTHUSIASM FOR APPOINTING ROYAL
COMMISSIONS, IT'S INTERESTING TO RECALL THAT AS EARLY AS
1903 A ROYAL COMMISSION WAS APPOINTED TO EXAMINE SITES AT
ALBURY, ARMIDALE, BOMBALA, LAKE GEORGE, ORANGE AND TUMUT
AND TO REPORT ON THEIR SUITABILITY AS POSSIBLE SITES FOR A
NEW NATIONAL CAPITAL. AND TOWARDS THE END OF THAT YEAR, THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DECIDED ON TUMUT, AFTER AN
EXHAUSTIVE AND DOUBTLESS EXHAUSTING VOTE. 
-2-
I WAS THAT CLOSE TO BEING ABLE TO LIVE AT THE LODGE, TUMUT.
3. BUT THE SENATE, IN THE WAY SENATES HAVEDECIDED
AGAINST TUMUT AND SUBSTITUTED BOMBALA INSTEAD, THE HOUSE
IN TURN DECLINED TO AGREE TO THE CHANGE AND THE BILL LAPSED,
DOUBLE DISSOLUTIONS WERE A LONG WAY OFF. IN 1904, A BILL
WAS INTRODUCED INTO THE SENATE, NAMING BOMBALA AS THE SITE BUT
WHEN. IT WENT TO THE HOUSE, THE MEMBERS DECIDED AGAINST.
BOMBALA AND SUBSTITUTED DALGETY. AND. PRESUMABLY BECAUSE
NEITHER BOMBALA NOR TUMUT HAD WON, AND HONOUR. WAS VINDICATED,
THE SENATE GRACIOUSLY AGREED TO DALGETY.
THAT IS WHEN THE BATTLE REALLY STARTED OF COURSE
BECAUSE DALGETY WAS OVER 200 MILES AWAY, AND QUITE BEYOND
THE PALE.., THE NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT OFFERED SITES
ONLY AT TUMUT, LYNDHURST AND YASS AND-CONVINCED MEMBERS
OF THE HOUSE THAT THE 1904 ACT HAD TO BE RECONSIDERED,
4. IT TOOK UNTIL 1908 FOR ANOTHER BILL TO BE INTRODUCED
PROVIDING FOR EXHAUSTIVE BALLOT ON NOMINATED SITES, AND TUMUT
1WAS BACK IN THE RUNNING, ONLY TO BE DEFEATED BY CANBERRA IN
THE END, BUT THE BATTLE CONTINUED IN THE PRESS, IN THE HOPE
THAT THE SENATE WOULD REJECT CANBERRA, PLUS CA CHANGE.
AND THE SENATE SUCCUMBED TO THE PRESS, AS IS ITS WONT, AND
LOOKED LIKED DEADHEATING ON CANBERRA. Sa / 3
I 
t
-3-
SENATOR lCCOLL SUDDENLY NOMINATED TUMUT, WHICH
WOULD HAVE SECURED CANBERRA'S SELECTION, SO THE DALGETY
SUPPORTERS VOTED FOR TUMUT, RESULTING IN 18 VOTES EACH
FOR CANBERRA AND TUMUT. IN A SECOND BALLOT, SENATOR McCOLL
AS SENATORS SOMETIMES DO CHANGED HIS MIND, DESERTED TUMUT
AND CAME BACK TO CANBERRA,
THE DEAKIN GOVERNMENT WAS TOTTERING AT THE TIME
THAT VOTE WAS TAKEN ON 6 NOVEMBER 1908, AND A WEEK LATER
WENT OUT OF OFFICE,. TO BE REPLACED BY ANDREW FISHER'S LABOR
GOVERNMENT. FISHER AND BILLY HUGHES THOUGhTTHE ARGUMENT
HAD GONE ON LONG ENOUGH, AND PROBABLY SAW NO JOY IN ANY
MORE UNNECESSARY TRIALS OF STRENGTH WITH THE SENATE, EIGHT
DAYS AFTER TAKING OFFICE, PRIME MINISTER FISHER SENT A COPY
OF THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT ACT TO THE NEW SOUTH ' ALES
PREMIER, WHOSE CO-OPERATION WAS IMMEDIATELY FORTHCOMING,
STRANGE, ISN'T IT, THAT LESS THAN TEN YEARS AFTER FEDERATION,
WHEN STATES RIGHTS WAS A VERY GENUINE PREOCCUPATION, A
NEW SOUTH IALES PREMIER SAW FIT TO PUT THE NATIONAL INTEREST
FIRST, REPLYING: " THIS GOVERNMENT IS ANXIOUS TO HAVE THE'LOCATION
OF THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT DETERMINED WITHOUT DELAY
AND WE ARE PREPARED TO CONSIDER IN A LIBERAL
MANNER ANY PROPOSAL OF THE. COMMONWEALTH IN THAT
DIRECTION. To SECURE FINALITY CONCESSIONS MAY
BE NECESSARY. THIS STATE IS NOT LIKELY TO
INSIST ON A RIGID INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
0
AND I FEEL SURE THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH
SWILL RECIPROCATE THE GENEROUS SPIRIT IN WHICH WE
ARE PREPARED TO DEAL WITH THE SUBJECT." 
-4-
PEHAPS I SHOULD SEND A COPY OF THAT GRACIOUS MISSIVE TO
MR LEWIS,
6. I CAN'T SAY NOW THAT I REGRET THE DECISION TAKEN
BY OUR PREDECESSORS EIGHT YEARS BEFORE I WAS BORN. TUMUT
IS A MUCH MORE RELAXING PLACE FOR NOT BEING THE FEDERAL
CAPITAL, AND I'M SURE ITS CITIZENS LIVE LONGER. THIS
AFTERNOON I'M TO MEET THREE RESIDENTS TO BE OF BLAKENEY
LODGE. THEIR COMBINED AGES ADD UP-TO 253 YEARS, I'M
SURE THEY RECALL THE CAPITAL CONTROVERSY; I WOULD BE
SURPRISED IF THEY WOULD HAVE WANTED TUMUT TO CHANGE TOO
MUCH IN THE LAST 80 YEARS.
7, ALTHOUGH TUMUT HAS NOT LOST ANY OF ITS CHARM,
IT HAS BEEN CLOSE TO AND AFFECTED BY ONE OF THE GREATEST
ENGINEERING UNDERTAKINGS OF THIS CENTURY, THE SNOWY IMOUNTAINS
O SCHEME. BEGUN BY BEN CHIFLEY'S LABOR GOVERNMENT IN 1949;
THE $ 800 MILLION SCHEME HAS PROVIDED STIMULUS AND EMPLOYMENT.
O IN AND AROUND TUMUT CULMINATING IN THE COMPLETION LAST
FINANCIAL YEAR OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF TUMUT 3, THE LAST AND
SLARGEST OF THE SNOWY PROJECTS. BUT THAT FACT SHOULD NOT BE
THOUGHT OF AS AN ENDING ONLY, RATHER IT IS THE END OF THE
-BEGINNING, BECAUSE TUMUT IS ONE OF THE GATEWAYS TO THE SCHEME
AND TO ALL THE TOURIST AND RECREATION FACILITIES IT HAS OPENED UP,
a 
I KNOW THE SHIRE COUNCIL IS ANXIOUS TO PURSUE
NEW EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE PEOPLE OF TUMUT, AND
THAT MUCH THOUGHTFUL WORK HAS BEEN DONE IN THIS REGARD,
I HAVE READ WITH INTEREST, FOR EXAMPLE, THE CASE YOU HAVE
PREPARED ON THE POSSIBILITY OF LOCATING A PULP AND PAPER
MILL FOR TUMUT, I UNDERSTAND YOUR RESERVATIONS AS WELL AS
YOUR ASPIRATIONS FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN THE AREA, AND
YOUR POSITION IN RELATION TO THE CURRENT CLIMATE FOR RURAL
INDUSTRIES, INEVITABLY AFFECTED AT PRESENT BY WORLD ECONOMIC
-TRENDS. I LOOK FORWARD TO MEETING AND, IN MANY CASES TO
RENEWING ACQUAINTANCE WITH COUNCILLORS AND THEIR WIVES WHO
CAN GIVE ME THE MOST UP TO DATE INFORMATION ON THE PROBLEMS
AS WELL AS THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE TUMUT SHIRE.
8, I MUST SAY I AM ALWAYS PLEASED TO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
. TO DISCUSS THE BROADER ISSUES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AT GRASS ROOTS
LEVEL-I TAKE GREAT PRIDE IN THE FACT THAT MY GOVERNMENT,
THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT, HAS GONE OUT OF ITS WAY TO
DEMONSTRATE ITS REAL INTEREST AND CONCERN FOR THE THIRD TIER
OF GOVERNMENT, THE ONE CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, THE LEVEL OF
GOVERNMENT MOST IGNORED BY OUR COALITION PREDECESSORS. ONLY
LAST YEAR WE LEGISLATED TO PROVIDE FOR THE ALLOCATION OF
DIRECT FEDERAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT, DIRECT
GRANTS BASED ON THE CASE ADVANCED IN EACH INSTANCE AT THE
GRANTS COMMISSION HEARINGS, AND, SIGNIFICANTLY, WITH NO
STRI NGS ATTACHED. I BELIEVE TUMUT SHIRE COUNCIL RECEIVED
$ 126,000 LAST YEAR AND I AM QUITE SURE YOU HAVE PUT UP A SOUND
AND PROPER CASE FOR THE NEW FINANCIAL YEAR,
dsC 
-6-
9. I KNOW THAT TUMUT, LIKE THE REST OF AU'STRALIA,
HAS SUFFERED FROM THE WORLD-WIDE ECONOMIC RECESSION AND
SUBSEQUENT UNEMPLOYMENT.
RED SCHEME GRANTS HAVE GONE SOME WAY TOWARDS
ALLEVIATING IMMEDIATE LOCALISED UNEMPLOYMENT. IN ALL boo
HAS BEEN ALLOCATED TO 26 PROJECTS INVOLVING / 62 JOBS,
MAJOR SHIRE COUNCIL UNDERTAKINGS HAVE INCLUDED ROAD REPAIR
AND MAINTENANCE WORK FOR 20 MEN FOR 16 WEEKS ($ 30,000),
AND $ 24,000 FOR WORK ON REPAIRING AND EXTENDING THE TUMUT
BOYS CLUB HALL, ANOTHER GRANT OF $ 25,400 MEANT 15 WEEKS
WORK FOR 8 MEN EMPLOYED ON RECREATIONAL PROJECTS OF
CONTINUING BENEFIT TO THE COMMUNITY,
THE NIATIONAL RURAL ADVISORY COUNCIL SET UP BY
SENATOR ' IRIEDT IS KEENLY AWARE OF THE PROBLEMS OF THE MAN
AND WOMAN ON THE LAND, AND IS CURRENTLY ENGAGED IN A
DETAILED STUDY OF HOW TO ATTRACT YOUNG PEOPLE INTO FARMING,
AS WELL AS LOOKING INTO EMPLOYMENT ALTERNATIVES WHICH WOULD
ENABLE OLDER PEOPLE TO LEAVE THE LAND EARLIER, IF THEY SO
WISH. THE QUESTION OF FARMER CO-OPERATIVES'IS ALSO BEING
STUDIED. ALL THIS WORK TOUCHES ON SOME OF TUMUT'S RURAL
PROBLEMS. ./ 7 
-7-
11, THE AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION SET UP.
LAST SEPTEMBER HAS RECEIVED A GRANT OF $ 200,000 TO FINANCE
MARKET RESEARCH PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT PROMOTION
ACTIVITIES. IN ADDITION TO SEEKING TO DIVERSIFY EXPORT
MARKETS, THE CORPORATION HAS MOUNTED A 1975 SEASON
PROMOTION CAMPAIGN TO STIMULATE CONSUMER DEMAND FOR APPLES.
WE CAN EXPECT THIS TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON APPLE PRODUCTION HERE
IN THE BATLOW TUMUT AREA. ALTHOUGH FRESH APPLE PRICES INSYDNEY
THIS YEAR HAVE BEEN SLIGHTLY BELOW COMPARABLE 1974
LEVELS, THEY ARE SUBSTANTIALLY ABOVE. COMPARABLE 1973 LEVELS,
O OBVIOUSLY A STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.
As FAR AS THE FRUIT CANNING INDUSTRY IS CONCERNED,
THE PICTURE IS BRIGHTER, BECAUSE THE 1974/ 75 TOTAL QUANTITY OF
CANNING FRUIT HAS INCREASED BY 12.5 PER CENT, AND PRICES
FOR APRICOTS ARE UP 32 PER CENT, PEACHES ARE UP 36 PER CENT
AND PEARS ARE UP 12 PER CENT OVER THE PREVIOUS YEAR. THE
INCREASE IN BOTH PRICES AND PRODUCTION INDICATE THAT GROSS
RETURNS TO GROWERS WILL BE UP ON LAST SEASON.
A NEW NATIONAL PANEL OF VEGETABLE GROWERS AND PROCESSORS
OF PEAS AND BEANS HAS RECENTLY BEEN ESTABLISHED TO BRING
PEOPLE TOGETHER TO. DISCUSS THE LONG-TERM FUTURE OF THE
INDUSTRY AND CONTRACT CONDITIONS. STANDARDISATION OF CONTRACTS,
PRICE RELATIVITIES, PRODUCTION AND MARKETING WILL ALL BE-.
DISCUSSED BY ThE PANEL WITH OBVIOUS BENEFIT TO PRODUCERS IN
THIS AREA. 
r -8-
12. ALTHOUGH THE FOREST INDUSTRIES AT TUMUT, AS
ELSEWHERE IN AUSTRALIA, ARE AT PRESENT SOMEWHAT DEPRESSED AS
A RESULT OF SOME DOWNTURN IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY, THE
FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE ASSURES ME THAT THE
SLONG TERM FUTURE OF THOSE INDUSTRIES IN THE TUMUT REGION IS.
S CONSIDERED TO BE QUITE BRIGHT.
W BEEF PRODUCERS CAN TAKE HEART FROM THE FACT THAT
WE ARE DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO DEVELOP MEAT MARKETS
AND REDUCE ARTIFICIAL TRADE BARRIERS, You MAY RECALL THAT.
S. IN APRIL THIS YEAR, SENATOR WRIEDT ANNOUNCED AN AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION OF $ 19,6 MILLION TO MATCH THE STATES IN
CARRY-ON FINANCE FOR AUSTRALIAN BEEF PRODUCERS. THIS IS
AVAILABLE TO FARMERS AT L PER CENT INTEREST WITH NO INTEREST
ON CAPITAL PAYMENTS FOR THE FIRST TWELVE MONTHS, AND OF
b COURSE IT WILL BE A GREAT HELP TO VERY MANY PEOPLE, BUT
CE'RTAINLY IN THE SHORT TERM BEEF PRODUCERS ARE GOING THROUGH
A DIFFICULT PERIOD.
13. BUT, LIKE THOSE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WHO OVER SEVENTY YEARS AGO EXPRESSED THE-IR BELIEF IN TUMUT,
I AM CONVINCED THAT THE LONG-TERM FUTURE OF TUMUT IS EXCELLENT.
I THINK YOU ALL FOR THE MARBLE GIFT WHICH WILL REMIND ME OF
YOUR KINDNESS AND HOSPITALITY TODAY IN TUMUT. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON.. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
TO THE WORLD ASSEMBLY OF WAR VETERANS IN AUSTRALIA,
SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE, 11 AUGUST 1975
I welcome on behalf of the Australian Government
the overseas delegates to this important assembly. Among
you are distinguished war veterans; many of you are renowned
for acts of conspicuous valour in the field or as prisoners of
war. It is an honour to have you among us. Your presence
is a reminder of the great world-wide fraternity of
ex-servicemen the universal kinship between men and women
who have fought for their country in war. Every nation recognises
an obligation to its war veterans. Australia accepts and
honours that obligation.
This is an appropriate moment and an appropriate
gathering at which to reflect on some of the great contemporary
issues of peace and war issues that concern you as former
servicemen and as responsible citizens of your countries.
Last week saw the thirtieth anniversary of the end of World
War 11. In the same week the heads of the European and North
American powers met in Helsinki to acknowledge formally the
realities of power in Europe and consolidate the basis of a
lasting peace. That meeting was part of the great international
movement of detente a movement that remains the supreme
challenge to modern statesmanship. Australia must lend her
voice to this movement. Australia must be part of this
worldwide quest for peace and international understanding.
. It has not always been easy for ex-servicemen' s
organisations to support these causes wholeheartedly. As an
ex-servicemen, as a member of the R. S. L. for the past 30 years,
I admire the efforts of the league to improve the welfare
of ex-servicemen and encourage the spirit of comradeship between
men and women who have served their country. Yet all too rarely
the sentiments and options of the R. S. L. strike a chord with
contemporary generations. Too often the R. S. L. seems out of
step; too often its public statements strike a note of
intolerance, of fanaticism. While Brezhnev and Ford were
meeting in Helsinki, what did we hear and read last week
in Sydney? the slogans of the fifties, the catchcries of
cold war ideology. The week before in another capital a
State Premier was advocating the acquisition of nuclear
weapons and guided missiles. It takes a brave man to query
fading slogans. But there have been brave men. Three years
ago at the New South Wales R. S. L. Congress the Governor,
Sir Roden Cutler, challenged the approach to Vietnam
and a decade before the Governor-General, Viscount De L'Isle, V. C.,
warned the National Congress on Cold War attitudes. The R. S. L.
must bring its influence and prestige to bear in a relevant and
constructive examination of the problems of peace and security.
Too often the younger generation likens the R. S. L. smoko, which
all of our generation enjoy, to Alexander's Feast, at which the
King in his cups Grew vain,
Fought all his battles o'er again,
And thrice he routed all his foes
And thrice he slew the slain. 
This year has seen the end of a long and terrible
war in Asia, a war that devastated a large part of our region
and baffled and demoralised the greatest democracy on earth.
The full consequences of the war its full cost in terms
of human life, material destruction, world inflation, shattered
morale, lost faith and broken ideals will perhaps never
be known. Perhaps the most evil consequence of Vietnam has
been a general disillusionment with democratic governments.
People are no longer disposed to believe what their governments
tell them. They are quite ready to believe that Governments
will lie and deceive their people when it suits them. The
necessary trust between governments and governed has been
undermined. The most urgent task for democracy is to rebuild
that trust in a geniune search for peace and human betterment.
And what R. S. L. leader was right on Vietnam?
Above all, we must not waste the opportunity
for peaceful reconstruction and international cooperation
which is now presented to the nations of South-East Asia,
including Australia. Opportunities for peace in the region
have been tragically wasted before; they must not be wasted
again. To say this is not to belittle the sacrifice and
courage of those who fought in Vietnam. To honour our war
dead, it is not necessary to approve of the conflicts in which
they took part. The frank acknowledgement of our past mistakes
and the greater those mistakes the franker and fuller that
acknowledgement must be is the first step to greater wisdom
and security. At the root of the whole ghastly malaise in
Vietnam, the whole tragic and futile struggle, was the
absence of any basic popular conviction that war was just.
The people did not believe in the war. The people of the
United States did not support it. The people of Australia
did not support it. And the people were right.
I believe the chief lesson of Vietnam has been
that no longer will it be possible for governments to fight a
war successfully without the broad support of their people.
There is no longer any automatic or slavish patriotism among
our people. Some may find this unpalatable or shocking;
others may see it as a mark of enlightienment. The fact remains
that the days have passed when any war could be relied upon
to bring an instantaneous surge of national fervour. It was
possible once to depend on such feelings in Australia. When
Australia was founded half the population was in uniform.
We were settled by the Royal Navy and a contingent of troops.
Australians fought in every war in which Britain was engaged,
up to and including the Malaysian campaign. Their first
expedition was to the Sudan 90 years ago; it embarked a few
hundred metres from where we are meeting. It was only in the
last decade that Australians fought overseas without British
troops beside them. The imperial connection which was the root
of our former patriotism is no longer sufficient to stir us.
The sending of a few battalions to Vietnam can no longer provoke
the automatic popular response, the unquestioning commitment,
that prevailed during the Boer War, for example, or during
World War 1 or 11. No one doubts that we were right to fight
Hitler and Tojo, but can the same be said of the earlier wars
in which Australia took part? From our present vantage point
the horrors of World War 1 are difficult to explain and
impossible to justify. I shall have the same difficulty in 
3.
justifying it to my grandson as Kaspar had in justifying
Blenheim: " And everybody praised the Duke
Who this great fight did win."
" But what good came of it at last?"
Quoth little Peterkin.
" Why that I cannot tell," said he,
" But -' twas a famous victory."
Apart from a few isolated incidents, the Australian
population has never experienced the horrors of war as the
civilian populations of Britain, Japan and the European
countries have done. The rigours of war have fallen on our
warriors alone. It is only recently through television
that we have seen in Vietnam what war means to a whole
population. It is perhaps for this reason that the anti-war
movement, the general revulsion against war as an instrument
of policy, has been-slower to take root in this country
than it has abroad. It is perhaps for this reason that
bellicose sentiments and cold war thinking have survived longer
in Australia, as they have in the United States, whose
civilian population has also been spared the devastation of modern
warfare. Our isolation has compounded these effects in
another way. As a result of the last war we embarked on a
vast program of immigration. In the first years of that
program many new citizens came here as refugees from Europe.
Many of those who came from the countries of eastern Europe
are inclined to think that those countries are the same as
they were before the war. They are reluctant to accept
the realities of the post-war world; they go on believing
that the old regimes will somehow be restored. In the case
of Yugoslavia, for example, this obsession has persuaded a
sizable minority of new Australians to get together and
venerate our enemies in the last war. By extolling the
Ustasha and the quisling Pavelic they advocate the
dismemberment today as they did in 1941 of the only nation
on the continent of Europe which had declared itself our
ally. It is an utter disgrace that a regime accepted
internationally a nation visited by President Ford and
the Queen should be vilified by a minority of agitators
in Australia. After Helsinki, does anyone really believe
that the situation in Europe will be changed by military
means or that the old regimes in Europe can be restored?
Our true interests lie in putting an end to
these obsessions with the past, in recognising the new
realities in our region and in the world at large, and in
developing humane and rational policies for peace and
international cooperation. These should be the concerns of
all progressive and contemporary ex-servicemen's organisations.
I pay tribute to the R. S. L. in promoting the welfare of
ex-servicemen and serving members of the forces. My own
Government has done a great deal in this field. Indeed
there is some irony in the fact that Australians with active
overseas service have been treated somewhat differently from 4 
4.
other Australians in the provision of government services.
Under our Federal system, the national Government has been
able to provide for servicemen and ex-servicemen such things
as health services, housing and adult training services
-that governments have failed or refused to provide for the
rest of the population. There is certainly a role for ex-servicemen's
organisations in looking after their members' interests.
There is a role for ex-servicemen's organisations as
concerned observers of the nation's defences. But let
this role be discharged in honest and constructive terms.
Let it take account of the realities of the world and the
aspirations of people everywhere for true peace and progress.
For who can doubt -that the world has changed
permanently in the last quarter of a century? For all
our present anxieties. and immense problems, who can doubt that
the world is a safer place than it was at the time of
Berlin, of Korea, of Cuba? For the first time in nearly
years no member of the Australian armed forces is fighting
in an overseas war. No Australian is on active service. The
gates of the temple of Janus are closed. The comparative
peace we now enjoy in our region and the comparative peace
we enjoy in the wider world should renew our determination to
preserve and strengthen peace everywhere. Ex-servicemen's
organisations must lend their support to this process.
In the presence and as the host of the most distinguished
and representative gathering of ex-servicemen in this
country the R. S. L. can make its contribution and bring
inspiration to this noble endeavour. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIN; E MINISTER,
THE HOIN. E. G. WHITLA-Q. C . Hi. P.,
AT NORNINGTON PENISINSULA MUN ICIPALITIES ASSOCIATION,
MORNINGTON, VIC. 12 AUGUST 1975
IT GIVES ME GREAT PLEASURE TO BE HERE WITH
YOU TONIGHT AS A GUEST OF THE QUARTERLY SOCIAL EVENING
ASSEMBLY OF THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA, MUNICIPALITIES
ASSOCIATION. I PAY TRIBUTE TO YOUR VISION IN CHOOSING
TO MEET TOGETHER, IN ASSOCIATION, WITH THE BEST INTERESTS
OF YOUR PENINSULA-AT HEART. WITHOUT SACRIFICING
YOUR DISINCTIVE INDIVIDUAL ELEMENTS, YOU WERE FARSIGHTED
ENOUGH TO REALISE THAT ON SOME MATTERS IT WOULD MAKE MUCH
MORE SENSE TO GO IT TOGETHER RATHER THAN ALONE. I CAN
UNDERSTAND THE INITIAL DIFFICULTIES YOU MIGHT HAVE FACED
IN PERSUADING PEOPLE THAT A QUARTERLY MEETING TOGETHER WAS NOT.
TANTAMOUNT TO SELLING OUT YOUR BIRTHRIGHT, BUT POSSIBLY A
STEP TOWARDS RECOVERING THAT BIRTHRIGHT, PARTICULARLY
IN AN AREA SO ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AS THE HIORNINGTON
PENINSULA, / 2 
2..
IAM QUITE SURE THAT EACH MEMBER ORGANISATION
THE CITY OF FRANKSTON AND THE SHIRES OF FLINDERS,
HASTINGS AMD JORNINGTON ITSELF -VALUES THE OPPORTUNITY
OF SHARING PROBLEMS AND WORKING TOGETHER ON SOLUTIONS
WHICH WILL BENEFIT THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE WHOLE
OF THE [ iORNINGTON PENINSULA. AND NOT JUST ONE PART OF
IT,. YOU HAVE A GREAT DEAL TO TEACH MANY OTHER DISTRICTS,
MANY OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES WHO MAY BE STILL INCLINED
TO SHY OFF THE IDEA OF ANY KIND OF REGIONALISM FOR FEAR
OF LOSING THEIR " INDIVIDUAL IDENTITIES. YOU HAVE
DEMONSTRATED, WITH YOUR ASSOCIATION, THAT THIS IS AN
UNFOUNDED FEAR. INDEED YOU ALL BELONG, AS WELL, TO
THE WESTERNPORT REG I ONAL ORGANI SATI ON OF COUN'CI LS WHICH
HAS DRAWN SUPPORT FROM THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S
. REGIONAL ORGANISATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM,
IT IS GRATIFYING TO ATTEND GATHERINGS
LIKE THIS, BECAUSE THEY PROVIDE AN EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY
FOR ME TO HEAR AT FIRST HAND HOW THINGS ARE GOING AT THE
GRASS ROOTS LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT, THE ONE CLOSEST
TO THE PEOPLE, IN THE LAST THREE MONTHS I HAVE ATTENDED
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS FROM FUMUT To LAUNCESTON.
FROM IPSWICH TO FOF; SES AND IN THE SPRAWLING SUBURBS
OF SYDNEY WHICH FORM MY OWN ELECTORATE. THE ACTUAL,
PROBLEMS DIFFER FROM PLACE TO PLACE, ACCORDING TO
DEMOGRAPHIC SHIFTS, BUT ESSENTIALLY THE CONSTANT ISSUE
IS HOW BEST TO FACILITATE THE DELIVERY OF GOVERNMENT
SERVICES TO PEOPLE WHERE THEY LIVE, BECAUSE THAT IS WHAT
AFFECTS THE QUALITY OF THEIR LIVES, 
L2 3.
THERE WAS A TIME, OF COURSE, WHEN PRIME
f "] INISTERS TENDED NOT TO GET INVOLVED IN AN YTHIN', G AS
ORDINARY AND BASIC AND RELEVANT AS LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS BENEATH THEIR DIGNITY TO BOTHER THEMSELVES WITH
HOW LOCAL GOVERNMENT COULD POSSIBLY MAKE ENDS MEET,
WITH FIOW ESSENTIAL SERVICES COULD BE MADE AVAILABLE
IN OUTER SUBURBAN' AREAS, WITH WHAT THE QUALITY OF LIFE
WAS GOING TO BE LIKE FOR ANY BUT THE COMFORTABLY
OFF. THAT WAS THE TIME WHEN LOCAL GOVERNMENT WAS
RATHER LESS THAN A POOR RELATION, MORE LIKE A
FOUINDLIN'IG THAT NEITHER PREMIERS NOR PRIME MINISTERS
WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT. BUT THINGS HAVE CHANGED, CHANGED
UTTERLY, ANID IN A REMARKABLY SHORT TIME,
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO, WE ANNOUN CED THIS YEAR'S
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT BODIES,
$ 79,908,000 THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, WITH $ 20,21-2,000
COMING TO VICTORIA. IT MAY NOT BE TOO OBVIOUS IF I MIENTION
THAT $/ 410,000 CAME TO THLE INDIVIDUAL SHIRE AND CITY COUNICILS
MAKING UP THE 1': 1ORNINGTON PENINSULA N'UNICIPALITIES ASSOCIATION,
THIS YEAR,) GRANTS REPRESENT AN INCREASE OF 387. FOR
VICTORIA ON LAST YEAR'S GRANTS, AND THE LEVEL OF PER
CAPITA ASSISTANCE HAS RISEN FROM $ 4.07 IN 1974/ 75 TO
$ 5.58 IN 1975/ 76. o,/ a4 
IT'S SO EASY NOW TO TALK ABOUT THIS
YEAR IS AND LAST YEARIS ALLOCATIONS AS THOUGH THEY
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN AROUND. BUT, OF COURSE, THEY HAVEN'T.
REMEMBER WHAT A STRUGGLE WE HAD TO GET THE PRINCIPLE
OF FUNDING ACCEPTED? SOME OF YOU MIGHT RECALL A CERTAIN
SECTION OF MY POLICY SPEECH IN 1972:
" VIE WILL GIVE LOCAL GOVERNMENT FULL
ACCESS TO THE LOAN COUNCIL AND GRANTS COMMISSION
NOT ONLY BECAUSE THE BURDENS BORNE BY TAXPAYERS AS
RATEPAYERS MUST BE REDUCED, BUT BECAUSE THE INEQUALITIES
MUST BE ATTACKED BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACTING
WITH AND THROUGH LOCAL GOVERNMENT."
IT WASN'T A VERY GLAMOROUS PROMISE BUT
IT WAS AN1 IMPORTANT ONE, AND IT WAS ATTACKED BY OUR
OPPONENTS AT STArE AND FEDERAL LEVELS, IBECAUSE THEY
WERE NOT INTERESTED IN THE RESPONSIBILITIES AND BURDENS
OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, THEY WERE UNABLE TO RESPOND TO
OUR PLEDGE TO HELP LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN ANY WAY OTHER THAN
TO KICK THE CENTRALIST CAN, BUT AS I POINTED OUT IN
ANOTHER POLICY SPEECH, IN MAY LAST YEAR,
" THE ROLE WE ASSIGN TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE REAL
ANSWER TO CHARGES OF CENTRALISM. UNDER A VARIETY OF
PROGRAMS WE HAVE PROVIDED LOCAL GOVERNMENT WITH THE FUNDS
TO UNDERTAKE THE RANGE OF ACTIVITIES PREVIOUSLY
INADEQUATELY CARRIED OUT OR TOTALLY NEGLECTED." 1 
I THEN MIENTIONED THE AUS;' RALIANi AssISTANCE
PLAN WHICH IS NOW UNDER CHALLENGE BY YOUR STATE
GOVERNMENT, ALONG WITH SUCH SUBVERSIVE PROGRAMS AS
MEALS ON WHEELS, HANDICAPPED PERSONS' WELFARE, HOME
NURSING SUBSIDIES AND BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICES.
THE HIGH COURT CHALLENGE WILL DETERMINE
WHETHER THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT CAN GIVE DIRECT
HELP TO THESE WELFARE SERVICES MANY OF THEM BEGUN
UNDER PREVIOUS PRIME MINISTERS, VICTORIAN PRIME MINISTERS
LIKE HENZIES, AND GORTON AND WHETHER SUCH AID MUST PASS
THROUGH THE DELAYING HANDS OF STATE GOVERNMENTS
OF WHATEVER HUE. BUT ALL THE PEOPLE IN RECEIPT OF
THESE SERVICES CARE ABOUT IS THAT THEY SHOULD BE PROVIDED
WHEN THEY ARE NEEDED. THEY ARE NOT LIKELY TO BE
SPEEDED UP BY PASSING THROUGH ANOTHER BUREAUCRACY.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES COULD TESTIFY TO THIS,
PARTICULARLY HERE IN THE MORNINGTON PENINSULAR WHERE
YOU HAVE NOT ONLY L12% OF YOUR POPULATION UNDER 21,
BUT ALSO A VERY HIGH PROPORTION OF ELDERLY AND RETIRED
PEOPLE WHO WILL BECOME INCREASINGLY DEPENDENT ON THE
SERVICES UNDER CHALLENGE IN THE HIGH COURT. ALREADY
A REGIONAL COUNCIL FOR: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT HAS BEEN
ESTABLISHED THROUGH THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE PLAN IN THE
WESTERNPORT REGION, AND IT HAS RECEIVED $ 57,468 IN THE
LAST TWO YEARS. 
6,
IN 1975/ 76, DEPENDING ON THE SUCCESS OF THE
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT'S CHALLENGE, THIS REGIONAL
COUNCIL WILL HAVE ACCESS TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE GRANT
OF $ 10,000 AS WELL AS GRANTS OF $ 12,000 EACH FOR FOUR
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS. I LEAVE YOU TO
DECIDE WHETHER SUCH ASSISTANCE COULD BE PROVIDED
MORE EFFECTIVELY IF IT HAD TO BE CHANNELLED THROUGH
STATE GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES, HAVING ORIGINATED
WITH AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS,
IT'S DISTRESSING TO SEE HOW OTHER EFFORTS
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS MADE ON BEHALF OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN THWARTED BY STATE GOVERNMENT,
BY STATE PREMIERS. YOU WILL RECALL OUR INSISTENCE THAT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BE REPRESENTED AT THE CONSTITUTIONAL
CONVENTION. BUT WE PROMISED ALSO TO GIVE YOU ACCESS TO
THE LOAN COUNCIL, AND I THOUGHT THAT I HAD SECURED SOME
SORT OF AGREEMENT FROM THE PREMIERS AT THAT CONVENTION
IN SEPTEMBER 1973. W'HEN TiHEY C'IME TO C/ NBERRA THE NEXT
MONTH, OCTOBER 1973, TO DISCUSS THE PROPOSAL, ALL THE
OLD PREJUDICES WERE ON SHOW AGAIN, ALL THE OLD JEALOUSIES
WERE PARADED, AND THE VOTES OF STATE PREMIERS EXCLUDED
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FROM THE LOAN COUNCIL. So THEN WE TOOK
IT TO A REFERENDUM. THE OFFICIAL CASE FOR NO WAS A
MARVEL OF MISREPRESENTATION, DELIBERATELY CREATING
CONFUSION IN PEOPLE'S MINDS ABOUT THE FUNCTIONS OF THE
LOANS COUNCIL AND THE GRANTS COMMISSION, NEVERTHELESS,
IN VICTORIA 47,383 VOTED YES, BECAUSE ENOUGH PEOPLE
IN VICTORIA REALISED HOW VITALLY THE PROPOSAL COULD AFFECT
THEM AS TAXPAYING, RATEPAYING CITIZENS, 
-7-
NOR WERE VICTORIANS IMPRESSED BY THE VIGOUR WITH WHICH
OUR OPPONENTS KICKED T HE CENTRALIST CAN IN THAT WHOLE
CAMPAIGN, As I SAID IN I'IAY LAST YEAR, THE AUSTRALIAN
ASSISTANCE PLAN AND SIMILAR PROGRAMS " ARE ALL ACTIVITIES
WHICH CANNOT BE CLOSELY REGULATED FROM THE CENTRE AND
ARE BEST PLANNED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORK( ING WITH LOCAL
COMMUNITIES." So MUCH FOR OUR CENTRALIST POLICIES,
IWELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO CLEAR UP THAT PARTICULAR
MISCONCEPTION, AND I AM GLAD THAT OUR SECOND ANNUAL
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS, LlIKE LAST YEAR'IS), HAVE
NO STRINGS ATTACHED. THAT IS IN LINE WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S FAITH IN THE FUNDAMENTAL GOOD
SENSE OF LOCAL GOV/ ERNMENT AND ITS ABILITY TO ORDER
IT-S OWN AFFAIRS AND SET ITS OWN PRIORITIES.
FOR flY PART, I WILL BE PARTICIPATING IN A SPECIAL
MEETING IN CANBERRA TOMORROW OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL
IN 16-
CONVENTION-3 G COMMITTEE DEALING WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
FRESH FROMIS AHRN TONIGHT, I WILL BE ABLET
GIVE PARTICULAR ATTENTION TO THE WORK( ING PARTY REPORTS
ON THE SUBMISSION MADE TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
BY THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL ON LOCAL GOVERNM ENT. WE SHALL
ALSO BE CONSIDERING THE GENERAL QUESTION OF GRANTS TO
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE PROBLEMS INVOLVED IN BORROWING.
BY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT ON BEHALF OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
SO YOU CAN SEE THAT OUR CONCERN FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT DOES
NOT STOP WITH THOSE STRAIGHT OUT., NO-STRINGS ATTACHED
GRANTS COMMISSION ALLOCATIONS. A 
-7, ATHE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO MOVED IN
OTHER AREAS TO HELP LIFT THE FINANCIAL BURDENS OF
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, AND TO ENSURE AS MUCH EQUALITY AS
POSSIBLE BETWIEEN REGIONS, ATTEMPTING TO ENSURE THAT
PEOPLE ARE NOT DISADVANTAGED BECAUSE THEY LIVE
IN ONE REGION RATHER THAN ANOTHER, WE ARE ATTEMPTING
TO REDUCE THE GAPS APPARENT IN THE PROVISION OF BASIC
SERVICES LIKE SEWERAGE PROGRAMS, URBAN LOCAL ROADS
AND TRANSPORT, CHILD CARE PROGRAMS, ATTEMPTING TO
REDUCE THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS WHICH HAVE
BEGGARED THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THIS COUNTRY, 
-8-
TAKE SEWERAGE, FOR EXAMPLE, IT IWASN'T A VERY NICE
WORD TC INTRODUCE INTO MY POLICY SPEECH IN 1972, BUT I DEFIED
THE NICETIES AND MENTIONED IT, AND MORE IMPORTANTLY, WE HAVE
DONE SOMETHING ABOUT IT IN THIS AREA. IN CONSULTATION WITH
STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES WE HAVE EMBARKED ON A NATIONAL
TEN YEAR PROGRAM TO CLEAR THE BACKLOG IN SEWERAGE SERVICES,
AND IN 1974/ 75, $ 2 MILLION WAS MADE AVAILABLE TO AUTHORITIES
IN THE MORNINGTON PENINSULA AREA FOR RETICULATION ANDt
TREATMENT IORKS. IT I'S HARD: TO REALISE THAT THIS KIND OF
EXPENDITURE ONLY CAME IN WITH A FEDERAL LABOR GOVERNMENT,
BUT WE ARE PROPERLY PROUD OF IT, I AND TO THINK JHAT JOHN GORTON
ONCE DEROGATIV LY DESCRIBED ME AS TALKING LIKE A SHIRE
PRESIDENT IT IS INTERESTING TO COMPARE THE CENSUS, FIGURES
OF 1947, JUST AFTER THE , AR,: WITH THOSEOF'OUR LAST CENSUS
iN 1971; IN 1947, MORNINGTON HAD 4004 PEOPLE; IN 1971, 14,289.
IrN 1947 FLINDERS HAD, 7,561 PEOPLE; IN 171, 15,481. AND
iN 1947 THEY COUNTED FRANKTON AND HASTINGS TOGETHER WITh
11,672 PEOPLE. IN 1971, HASTINGS HAD GROWN TO 8,927.,
FRANKSTON WAS UP TO 59,410. i
. HILE THE AVERAGE AGE WAS 32.4 AT 1947 CENSUS TIME
IN FRANKSTON/ HASTINGS IT HAD COME DOWN TO 28.7 BY 1971.
THIS HELPS EXPLAIN WHY TODAY, 42 PER CENT OF THE POPULATION
IS UNDER 21, AND. WHY THE CIY OF FRANKSTON ALIONE HAS 18
STATE PRIMARY SCHOOLS, 4 HIGH SCHOOCS, 3 TECHNICAL SCHOOLS,
7 PRIVATE SCHOOLS, 16 PRESCHOOLS AND 10 INFANT WELFARE CENTRES
FOR ITS PRESENT POPULATION, OF 74,000,
.7 
.7 3-
YET AT THE SArMIE TIME; A LARGE PROPDRTION OF THE
POPULATION ARE ELDERLY PEOPLE Wk-HO A-lAVE CHOSEN TO LIVE OUT
' TrHEIR RETIREMENT YEARS NOT JUST TH_,-IR SUMPAIERS I: ET [
PENI NS U LA S UNNSr I NE THESE-OLDER RESIDENTS HAVE A RIG. HT
TO SEE K SUPPORTIVE , SERVICES FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
ASSISTED BY THHEl USTRALI N GVERNM'ENT.' I " KNOW THE
irI-NEPS SFIIrE HAS ' DUILT TWO ELDERL'i( CITI 7ENS CLUBS, IN
TrHE LAST fO EARRLS401 , WOV IT R000RTHOE FEDERAL
bOVER~\ iM: TO RTOSEBUD AND $ 73,050 TO IROJMNAA NA
I1 THE rHOIEL P EN INSULA AREA WE HVE PROVIDEl OVER
IiIL ,0DQE LI-/ ERED MEALS SUBSIDY SINCE 1972, AND $ 231,643
FOR~ PESONAL CARE SUBSi--S-Ii\ 4 19714 wE GAVE 37I. 0
TO TH E C" OUIINTRY liOMEN'llS ASSOCATATIONM, H0' i1OJNGTN FOR FOUR
HO STFEL -BEDS AND IN MlAY Li ST YlAR A COM. iNED; CURCH o
ENLA ) D PROJECT FOR ST PAcUL'S FRAiNKSTbVN rECIVED A GRANT
OF $ 555,720 FOR 1. iHOSTEL BEDS UN. 1D IER' ' B'OT H THE AGUED
PERSONs ' i" HMES AND HOSTELS A CTS,
IT IS NOT SURPRIS. ING THAT TH E FRAN
FHAS'APP ED UNND\ ERTA'K NIG OF A COMPREHENSIVE
STRATEGY PLAN FOI-ALL 3CT$ OF FUTURE DEVELOPlENT OF
THE CITY. I BELIEVE A \ STRONG WORKI NG RELATIONSH 1P
EXISTS 1ETWEEN THE TO14iNil PLANNING AND SOCIAL'WELFARE
DEPAERTMIE1 TS SO THE SOCIAL CONiSEQUENCES OF THE PLANNING
OF FACILITIES AND AMENITIES CAN BE PREIDETERMINED,
I a':' k
,1. a
I " Ia 
REALISING THE EFFECT ON QUALITY OF LIFE OF
INADEQUATE PUBLIC TRANSPORT GENERALLY, AND PARTICULARLY
IN AREAS SUDDENLY SUBJECT TO COMMUTER PRESSURES,
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IN 1973/ 74 APPROVED
CONSTRUCTION OF A THIRD TRACK BETWEEN CAULFIELD AND
MORDIALLOC, AND AN ADDITIONAL PLATFORM AT INTERMEDIATE
STATIONS UNDER THE URBAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT PROGRAM.
AT JUNJE 30 THIS YEAR, THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAD
SPENT $ 1,9 MILLION ON THE PROJECT, WHOSE FIRST
STAGE, ALREADY APPROVED, BETWEEN CAULFIELD AND
CHELTENHAM IS ESTIMATED TO COST $ 6 MILLION,
IN ADDITION TO THIS, $ 424,000 HAS BEEN SPENT ON
URBAN LOCAL ROADS IN THE PENINSULA AREA IN 1974/ 75
AND $ 5,663,500 ON LAND ACQUISITION AND CONSTRUCTION
OF URBAN ARTERIAL ROADS, INCLUDING THE MIORNINGTON
PENINSULA FREEWAY AND THE FRANKSTON FREEWAY,
BUT COMMUNICATIONS DON'T STOP WITH ROADS
AND RAILWAY LINES. LAST MONTH A NEW TELEPHONE EXCHANGE
WAS OPENED AT MORNINGTON, ADDING TO THE 13 SMALL
EXCHANGES OPENED SINCE 1972, AND NEW ONES ARE PLANNED
FOR BAXTER, HASTINGS, LANGWARRrN, SOMERVILLE AND
TYABB AT AN ESTIMATED COST OF $ 5 MILLION, , l/ ii 
Il.
THIS GIVES 501E IDEA OF THIE AMOUNT OF
WORK WHICH MUST BE ON TO COPE ALL TIHES; E Nl" EW
DEMOGRAPHIC PRESS. 1URES, A11. TO ENSUIRE * r-iAT LIVING STANDARDS
ARE PlAlINTAINED WHEN PEOPLE, FOR WHATEVER REASOINS FIND
THEMHSELVES LIVIN-, G AND aO: RKING IN PLACES VIHICH ' NOT SO LONi-G
AGO, USED TO IDE A LONG Wt'AY AWdAY,
Li i\ i FRuAW., KSTON CITY COUNCIL, ALL THE MEMBERS
OF THE : I1ORN1INGTON1 PE-H1lNSULA IlUNICIPALITIEs ASSOCIATION
HAVE REAL ISED THE FUN" DAMEN-TAL I MPORTANCE OF PLANING
FOR THE FUTURE. ch iRIGO SHIRE ITSELF, TAKING
il-l liN'IH ILI A, N0iO2'! IINGTON AND ;"-IOU~ NT IARTHA, HAS HAD
A INCREASE IN POPULATION IN 10 YEARS. ITS NEWEST
TOWNil PLANING SCEEHAS BENPRE-PARE" D BY COUNCIL IN
ASSOCIATIONl WI1TH TOWN PLANN11ING CON" SULTANTS AND THE
ES TERNPORT [ REG IONA'LPLAN GATHRIT TO WH ICHFLIN".
DEcRS) SH-1IRE ALSO B'ELONGS. A JI" OUNT E-LIZ7A STUDY HAS BEENM
COMM'ISSJONED JOiNTLY WITH TfHE CITY OF FRA'NKS-ToN AND IS
CURRi) ENTLY 3 lNGCONSIDE! R) ED BOTH COUNCI LS.
IEXPECT THAT BOTH TH-E SE SCHE; MES HAVE THEIR
SH\ RE OF KNOCKERS; INEVITABLY THERE WILL BE SOME PEOPLE
UNHAPPY AT THE PROSPECT OF AN' Y ENCROACHMENT ON THEIR
PROSPECTS AS PROPERTY OWNERS, BUT TIHE IMPORTANT ASPECT OF T1 -E1
[' 1ORN\ INGTON STUDY IS THAT IT PLACES PROPE--R EMPHASIS O . N
LANDSCAPE AN4D CONrSER-PVATFION FEATURES, AND IS LOOKING TO
PRESERVE LAN." D INOW FOR THE ENJOYMENT OF GENERATIONS TO
COME, [ HOISE WHO CAINE EARLY IN SEARCHI OF THE DISTRICT'S
BEAUTY WOULD SURELY APPROVE, / 12 
AND IT IS IN THIS CONTEXT THAT THE URBANi
LAND COUNCILS INVOLVEMENT IN THE PURCHASE OF
HECTARES OF LAND ON THE MIORNINGTON PENINSULA AND 6 ON
PHILLIP ISLAND MUST BE SEEN, THE URBANi LAND COUNCIL
CONTRIBUTED $ IL! MILLION TOWARDS THE TOTAL COST OF.
$ 2.1 MILLION IN 197L4/ 75, THE PENINSULA LAND WILL BE
BROUGHT UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THE VICTORIAN
NATIONAL PARKS ACT 195 AND THE PHILLIP ISLAND
HOLDING WILL BE ADDED TO EXISTING RESERVES.
UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S INATIONAL
ESTATE PROGRAM, THE IORNINGTON PENINSULA WILL BE
INCLUDED IN A $ 21,000 COASTLINJE STUDY WHICH WILL BE
CARRIED OUT BY THE MINISTRY FOR CONSERVATION AND THE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING BOARD OF VICTORIA. ANOTHER
GRANT OF $ 119,350 HAS ASSISTED WITH THE ACQUISITION
OF" THE BRIARS" AS AGREED BETWEEN THE AUSTRALIAN AND
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENTS AND THE " IORNINGTON SHIRE,
TOURISM AND RECREATION GRANTS OF $ 80,000 HAVE GONE
TOWARDS THE CONSTRUCTION OF SCENIC WALKWAYS AND AN
INFORMATION BUREAU ON PHILLIP ISLAND,
CLEARLY A GREAT DEAL HAS BEEN DONE ALREADY,
BUT MUCH REMAINS TO BE DONE TO PRESERVE AND PROTECT
THE BEST FEATURES OF THE PENINSULA, AND THIS IS A
CHALLENGE TO THE WHOLE COMMUNITY, NO LESS TO INDIVIDUALS
THAN TO SHIRES AND COUNCILS. EVERY EFFORT SHOULD BE
MADE TO INVOLVE PEOPLE IN CARING ABOUT THE FUTURE BY
ENCOURAGING THEM TO CARE ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS TODAY. 
-13-
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVER, N M'ENT HAS PROVIDED ASSISTANCE TO
ENViRONMENTAL PROTECTION GROUPS ANXIOUS TO PREPARE
PROPERLY DOCUMENTED SU. BMISSIONS ON CERTAIN DEVELOPMENTAL
PROJECTS, BOTH THE NiOUNT ELIZA ASSOCIATION FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL CARE AND THE AESTERNPORT AND PENINSULA
PROTECTION COUNCIL HAVE RECEIVED GRANTS 1I THE LAST
TWO YEARS. FINALLY I COME TO THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS OF
THE SHIRE OF HASTINGS, THE SITE OF A NUMBER OF
DEVELOPMENTAL BATTLES OVER THE LAST TEN YEARS. IT IS
MORE INSTRUCTIVE TO LOOK AT ITS INCOME AND EXPENDITURE
FIGURES THAN ITS CENSUS FIGURES. IN 1961/ 52 THE
INCOME OF THE HASTINGS SHIRE WAS $ 180,580 AND ITS
EXPENDITURE $ 217,960, IN 197'!/ 75 ITS INCOME HAD RISEN
SOMEWHAT: TO $ 2,123,00, To BE PRECISE, AND
EXPENDITURE WAS A MERE $ 2,1! 4,14i. 1 THE REASON OF
COURSE IS THE PHENOMENAL INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE
AREA. IT MAY BE A CASE OF THE CHICKEN BEFORE THE EGG.
BECAUSE IT ALL SEEMS TO HAVE HAPPENED AFTER THE/ LAID
THE GOLDEN EGG IN SOMERVILLE, THEN CAME BP.' s OIL
REFINERY AND LIQUID FUELS PIER AT CRIB POINT, THE Esso/
BMHP. GAS FRACTIONALISATION PLANT AT LONG ISLAND, THE
CRESCO FERTILIZER PLANT, WHICH WAS THEN REDEVELOPED BY
Esso/ B,!, P, AND FINALLY-JOHN LYSAGHT'S INTEGRATED STEEL
WORKS AT WESTERNPORT BAY, So FAR $ 92 MILLION HAS BEEN
SPENT ON DEVELOPMENT. EVENTUALLY IT WILL COST IN EXCESS
OF $ 1 BILLION AND PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT FOR 2,500 PEOPLE,
850 OF WHOM ARE ALREADY ON THE JOB, ,/ 14 
a 14,
THE FIGURES ARE REALLY QUITE STAGGERING, SO TOO ARE
THE RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED ON HASTINGS SHIRE COUNCIL
IN ENSURING THAT ALL THIS DEVELOPMENT, WITH ALL ITS
ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL BENEFITS, SHOULD NOT BE AT THE
EXPENSE OF THE QUALITY OF LIFE IN THE WHOLE M ORNINGTON
PENINSULA AREA, I AM CONFIDENT THAT, ACTING IN CONCERT
WITH THE OTHER MORNINGTON PENINSULA MUNICIPALITIES, AND IN
THIS ASSOCIATION, YOU WILL MEET THAT CHALLENGE.
CERTAINLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE READY TO HELP. 



CHIFLEY MEMORIAL LECTURE, DELIVERED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
14 AUGUST 1975
As the fourth Chifley Memorial lecturer in 1957 I said:
" The way of the reformer is hard in Australia." I
intended neither pessimism nor prophecy, although one may
concede that little has occurred in the intervening 18 years
or the last two and a half years to lead to the belief that
reform in Australia is altogether a primrose path. In my 1957
lecture I attempted to point up the difficulties confronting
the Australian Labor Party in carrying out its policies under
a federal system and in particular the impediments which the
Australian Constitution placed in the way of achieving reform.
This was no exercise in negativism, in finding excuses.
You will accept that that has never been my way. I was however
concerned then by the way in which the Labor Party's failure
to move on, to look ahead, to attempt to find new ways towards
reform was shortchanging the Australian people and shortchanging
the Party itself. In 1957, the Platform, policies and structure
of the Australian Labor Party had remained basically unchanged
since the days of the Chifley Government, already by then
8 years distant. Even in 1957, the Party still tended to interpret
the 1949 election result as an aberration, much as the Liberals
today still see 1972 as an aberration. The Party became
obsessed with the idea that rather than being about renewal for
the future, its purpose was to return to a more comfortable past
not renovation but mere restoration. As a result, both the
achievements of the past and the hopes for the future receded
equ~ ally . The Party stagnated and the Platform was stultified.
For his heirs, the setbacks which Chifley had met
became not an experience for building but an excuse for baulking.
At best we learnt only half the lesson of the Chifley experience.
We acknowledged that we could not nationalise the banks or indeed
any important part of the economic system, but our rhetoric remained
unchanged the rhetoric both in the Platform and from our
platform speakers. In at least one policy speech the acknowledgement
of the Constitutional impossibility of nationalisation was
presented as if it were a positive undertaking impotence was
to be a guarantee of future good behaviour. The acknowledgement
became an alibi an alibi for the Party's failure to develop new
policies, to work out new programs whereby the basic ends
envisaged by Chifley could be achieved by other means.
In 1956 I had been elected a member of the Joint
Committee on Constitutional Review. By virtue of that experience,
I became better acquainted and more preoccupied with the
difficulties and barriers raised by the Constitution against not
only reform but good government in Australia. With one exception
national responsibility for Aborigines the Constitution remains
unchanged, despite the unanimous all-Party recommendations of the
Committee in 1958 and 1959. These unanimous recommendations covered
a wide range of matters, particularly in the fields of economic
management and electoral reform. All-Party acceptance in 1959
has become partisan resistance whenever the opportunity to
implement these recommendations has arisen. / 2 
-2-
For example, it is often forgotten that all Parties,
the Country Party as much as the Liberal Party, accepted the
recommendation of the Committee that the enrolment in any
electorate should not vary by more than 10 per cent from the
average enrolment in all electorates within a State. As a
result of the Joint Sitting last year, that all-Party
recommendation is now the law of the land. But partisan
resistance has nullified that law. The redistribution proposals
by which alone the recommendation of the Committee of 1959 and
the legislation of the whole Australian Parliament in 1974 could
be made a reality have been rejected by the Senate.
Yet despite the lack of Constitutional amendment, there
has been Constitutional advance not by amendment at referendums,
but by interpretation in the High Court. The High Court, in
such matters as monopolies and restrictive trade practices, civil
aviation and television, has widened the powers of the national
Parliament in ways which, in my 1957 lecture, I looked for
through Constitutional amendment.
The chief purpose of my 1957 Chifley lecture was
therefore to examine not just the barriers against Labor reform
put up by the Constitution but the means by which these reforms
could be achieved within the Constitution. I put the view that,
while amendment of the Constitution must remain a fundamental
objective, neither the Party nor the nation should be expected
to wait indefinitely for amendment before reform. It was not
a question of trying to circumvent the Constitution, but to
make the best use of it, not supinely to accept the limitations
of powers imposed by the Constitution, but to use the powers
offered by it. For example I said:
" In our obsession with Section 92 which is held up
as the bulwark of private enterprise, we forget
Section 96, which is the charter of public enterprise."
I further illustrated how in the fields of social welfare, health,
education, housing, transport, urban and regional development,
industrial relations, restrictive trade practices and law reform,
significant advances could be achieved under existing powers to
a very great extent* The themes foreshadowed in that lecture
became the basis for the substantial rewriting of the Platform
at subsequent Federal Conferences of the Australian Labor Party,
particularly the great reform Conferences of 1967, 1969, and 1971.
The policies thus developed provided the framework for the 1972 policy
speech and to that extent, the framework for the programs of the
Australian Labor Government in the past two and a half years.
My purpose in this lecture is to review those programs
in terms of the basic objectives they were designed to achieve,
to examine how the successes of the program may best be
consolidated in the light of the economic conditions in which
Australia now finds herself.
It is easy enough to generalise about the need for reform.
Reform, however, must be relevant to objectives which are both
desirable in themselves and perceived to be desirable by the public.
A reform Party needs to convince a majority of the people that the
reforms it proposes are desirable and a reform Government has to
keep them convinced. Quite apart from overriding questions of
economic management there are always going to be four special / 3 
-3-
difficulties in that task. The first is the sheer problem of
public perception of what has been done and why it is being donethe
so-called communications problem. There may be even some
Members of Parliament who might not pass an examination of the
substance of the Government's programs.
Secondly, there is a law of diminishing returns in
politics whereby a demand once met ceases to be an issue.
Thirdly, there is frequently a long delay between implementing
a reform and the delivery of its actual benefits. Fourthly,
a great many reforms by their very nature benefit and are
expressly intended to benefit a minority in the community who,
in general, are among the least articulate and least influential
in the community; they are therefore the people least able to
translate their grievances into political action or their
gratitude into effective political support.
In a sense the Party of reform in a democratic system
carries a self-created handicap as a reforming Government.
In Opposition, its essential task is to raise the public
perception of the need for change, the need for reform. That is,
its task is to raise expectations. The nature of politics,
founded as it is on human nature itself, is that there will
always tend to be a gap, a shortfall, between expectations
aroused and expectations met.
A conservative Government survives essentially by
dampening expectations and subduing hopes. Conservatism is
bas ically pessimistic; reformism is basically optimistic.
The great tradition which links the American and French
revolutionaries of the Age of Reason with the modern Parties
of social reform is the tradition of optimism about the possibility
of human improvement and human progress through the means of
human reason. Yet inevitably there will be failures, and the
higher expectations rise, the greater the likelihood of at least
temporary failure to meet them.
Up to December 1972 the task of the Australian Labor
Party was three-fold: first to state the reforms we proposed,
secondly to state the means by which we intended to achieve
those reforms, thirdly to convince a majority of the electorate
that those reforms were both achievable and desirable. We
achieved office because we raised expectations and convinced a
sufficient majority that those expectations could be met.
Yet the specific reforms we proposed were related to
general goals and had to be so related if they were to be seen
and accepted as part of our general mandate to govern. The
meaning of the " mandate" in a Parliamentary system has been
subject to critical analysis by Parliamentarians and academics
for more than a century. In Australia the meaning has been
especially scrutinised in the past two and a half years because
of the very great emphasis my own Government has always placed
on the fulfilment of the program set out in the policy speech of
1972 and confirmed in the policy speech of 1974. Another reason
why the meaning of the " mandate" has become significant in the
current Australian political debate is because of the existence
of a hostile majority in the Senate and the use to which that
hostile majority has been put. So the debate about the meaning
of the mandate has centred on the question of whether in 1972 / 4 
and again in 1974 the Australian Labor Party was given only
a general mandate to govern or a specific mandate to implement
each part of its program.
Is the mandate merely general or is it specific? Is it
a grant of permission to preside or a command to perform? our
opponents naturally interpret it in the weakest sense as a
general and highly qualified mandate to govern on their terms
and indeed by their grace and favour. I interpret the mandate
as being both general and specific a general mandate to govern
for the term for which we were elected and a specific mandate
to implement the undertakings we made, within that term. But even
when I speak of a general mandate I cannot accept the conservative
definition of a mere mandate to govern, a permit to preside over
the administration of government and, hopefully, to administer
the existing system in a sufficiently acceptable way to give
reasonable prospects of re-election for a further renewal of
the mere mandate to preside. The mandate as I interpret it is
to move by specific programs toward the general goals and the
general objectives accepted by the people at the elections.
What was that goal? I defined it in these words in the
Parliament on 5 March 1970:
" on this side we believe there is one clear goal that
this national Parliament should set for itself, which should
define and motivate each specific action we take. It is the goal
of equality. The true quality of our national life will be
principally determined by the way in which and the rate at which
we advance towards true equality. It is this that gives meaning
to our possession of prosperity. If I interpret the history of
this country and the character of our countrymen and women
correctly, it is this search which alone can give any worthwhile,
enduring meaning to our fortuitous possession of this most
fortunate, peaceful and privileged continent in this most turbulent
and deprived region of the world."
I regard the thrust towards equality as the natural
extension of the great thrust of the Chifley Government which
was towards security for all. There is no phrase more quoted
than Chifley's " light on the hill'. Very few remember what the
metaphor meant. As Chifley used it it was not-just a fine phrase
but a quite specific objective it was security. As Chifley
said in the policy speech of 1949:
" it is the duty and responsibility of the community
and particularly those more fortunately placed, to
see that our less fortunate fellow-citizens are
protected from those shafts of fate which leave
them helpless and without hope. That is the
objective for which we are striving. It is the
beacon, the light on the hill to which our eyes
are always turned and to which our efforts are
always directed."
In other words Chifley saw that the fundamental duty of the
community, acting as a whole through its elected representatives,
was to provide security for all its members. To that I add the
basic objective of promoting the basic goal of equality. As I
see it, the two goals are inseparable. I have always put the
search for equality in positive terms, that is, the promotion of
equality, not the imposition of equality. As I implied in my 
1957 Chifley lecture and specified some years later in my
Curtin Memorial lecture of 1961:
" Socialists are now more concerned with the creation
of opportunities than the imposition of restraints.
Within Australia we do not have to ration security
but to plan abundance."
I state the underlying philosophy in this way: in
modern communities, even the wealthiest family cannot provide
its members with the best education, with the best medical
treatment, the best environment, unaided by the community.
Increasingly, the basic services and opportunities which determine
the real standard of life of a family or an individual can only
be provided by the community and only to the extent to which
the community is willing to provide them. Either the community
provides them or they will not be provided at all. In the
Australian context, this means that the community, through the
national government, must finance them or they will not be
financed at all.
over the span of years the common factor which links
the doctrine of security and the doctrine of
equality is the insistence upon community responsibility for
the promotion of these twin goals.
This concept of equality what I call positive equalitydoes
not have as its goal equality of personal income. Its goal
is greater equality of the services which the community provides.
This approach not merely accepts the pluralistic nature of our
system, with the private sector continuing to play the greater
part in providing employment and growth; it positively requires
private affluence to prevent public squalor. The approach is
based on this concept: increasingly a citizen's real standard
of living, the health of himself and his family, his children's
opportunity for education and self-improvement, his access to
employment opportunities, his ability to enjoy the nation'ss
resources for recreation and cultural activity, his ability to
participate in the decisions and actions of the community, are
determined not so much by his income but by the availability
and accessibility of the services which the community alone can
provide and ensure.
The quality of life depends less on the things which
individuals obtain for themselves and can purchase for themselves
from their personal incomes and depends more on the things which the
community -provides for all its members from the combined resources of
the community. What we aim at is the achievement of the classic liberal
idea of the career open to the talents equality of opportunity
in a vastly expanded form. Equality of opportunity is a splendid
ideal; but to confine it to equality of job opportunities is not
merely to restrict it, but to negate true equality of opportunity.
The older, narrower ideal of equality of opportunity concentrated
almost exclusively on education. The assumption was that the mere
provision of free education would guarantee equality of opportunity.
Even in a community as homegeneous and socially mobile as
Australia this has proved not to be the case. / 6 
In modern communities, not least Australia, opportunities,
social, economic and cultural opportunities are really determined
by where a family lives, even more than by a family's income. So
we have no preoccupation with equality of incomes. We are striving
for an equality of environment in the total sense of those things
which increasingly the community alone can provide welfare,
health, education, recreation, transport.
The general argument against this concept turns on the
question of private incentive and individual initiative. This
really gets to the heart of the philosophical differences between
the Labor Party and its opponents. The argument that collective
welfare destroys private incentive is a very old one indeed.
It is the argument which has been used to resist every advance
in social welfare, even the most basic ones, such as the provision
of old-age pensions. It was the argument used at every stage of
the very massive expansion of the social security system under
Curtin and Chifley represented in money terms by an increase
from $ 36 million provided before the war to $ 200 million in 1949.
Such were the colossal sums which Chifley used in those days
to undermine free enterprise and destroy individual incentive.
The argument is in fact based on a particular view about
human nature and human motives. In the final analysis it
predicates fear and greed as being the principal spurs to human
action. It says in effect that if people know they are guaranteed
an income in retirement they will be both lazy and improvident during
their earning days; if people are not afraid of the price of
sickness they will abuse and overuse the health services the
community provides; if public schools are made as good as
private schools then parents will not work so hard to earn the
fees for their children's eductional; if the attempt is made to
make underprivileged communities more decent places to live,
people will lose the competitive urge.
we are going to hear a lot more of these arguments,
put in perhaps more subtle ways. The counterargument is that
the removal or reduction of basic fears and insecurities, far
from being a limitation on individual incentive, represents a
liberation for human creativity. The contest between the two
opposing views of human nature and human society is still the
esseace of the philosophical debate between the Parties to
the extent that the political debate is conducted in terms of
philosophy and to the extent to which either Party can be said
to have a philosophy.
The programs developed between 1967 and 1971 and presented
in the policy speech of 1972 sought to give practical application
to these attitudes. A political program, particularly a program
for a democratic election is of course not an essay in philosophy.
Policies are not developed in a political or economic vacuum;
still less are they implemented in a vacuum once the appeal to the
electorate has been successful. The program as presented in 1972
had to be related to economic and political realities as we
judged them to be in 1972 and as we assumed, to the best of our
judgement, they would exist during the three years for which we
sought and won a mandate. Carrying out the program has to be
related to the political and economic realities as they exist.
In 1972, we made two important assumptions which seemed very
reasonable at the time. One was political; the other was economic.
Both proved partly wrong. The first, the political assumpetion
was that if elected we would have a clear three years to fulfil
the program. / 7 
-7-
The second, the economic assumption was that domestic
growth would be sufficiently restored and that the world economy
would remain strong enough to permit an avowedly expansive and
expensive program of social reform to be implemented without
massive tax increases or without massive inflation.
The fundamental and continuing difficulty of the
Government has been and remains to reconcile the demands of the
program with the falsification of two of the key assumptions on
which it was based.
It is hard to estimate and hard to exaggerate the damage
done to the Australian political system and the Australian economy
by the conduct of the majority in the Senate. From the beginning,
that conduct has had one overriding objective to deny the
very legitimacy of the Labor Government. But its real effect
has been to cast doubt on the legitimacy of an elected Government
itself, to cast doubts on the legitimacy of the electoral and
constitutional proceses.
One has to bear in mind that the elections of 1972 were
for the House of Representatives alone. The program was drawn
up as a 3-year program. Whatever the result of the 1972 elections,
the state of the Parties in the Senate had to remain unchanged;
an anti-Labor majority was guaranteed until at least July 1974.
So the question of who would control the Senate was
never an issue in 1972. If you cast your minds back, you would
agree that nobody approached the 1972 campaign with any thought
other than what Australians were doing then was electing a
Government for a normal three-year term. There. might have been
some fleeting thought given to the possibility of the circumstances
by which Labor, if successful, might be brought to the need for a
double dissolution. But certainly no-one seriously considered
the possibility of the House of Representatives being forced to
an election by the refusal of Supply by the Senate. And no-one
considered the possibility of a double dissolution triggered off by
the threat of refusal of Supply by the Senate. It has been a remarkable
example of the unthinkable becoming apparently quite acceptable.
During the 1974 campaign I frequently quoted an article
written in 1968 by Sir Robert Menzies in which he castigated Senate
pretensions as " a falsification of democracy". That phrase is
now very well known. What is not so well know is that what
Sir Robert Menzies was condemning was not the ultimate falsificationthe
refusal of Supply but the repeated rejection by the Senate
of legislation passed by the House of Representatives by the
majority forming the Government. I quote from Sir Robert Menzies'
article in the Sydney Daily Telegraph of 18 February 1968:
" In Australia we practise the system of ' responsible
government'. Indeed it has been judicially declared
that it is embodied in our Constitution by necessary
implication. In that system Ministers sit in and are
responsible to Parliament; but Cabinet may be
displaced by a vote of the House of Representatives
( not Sir Robert's emphasis the Senate) and therefore
holds office at the will of the House of Representatives...
" It would be a falsification of democracy if, on any matter
of Government policy approved by the House of Representatives
possibly by a large majority, the Senate, representing
the States and not the people, could reverse the decision." 1 
-8-
The basis of Sir Robert's concern at that time early
in 1968 is interesting and instructive. He was writing shortly
after the Liberal Party had elected Senator Gorton as its leader.
Sir Robert's concern was that once the Senate had made the
big breakthrough in providing a Prime Minister, its ambitions
and pretensions would thereby increase. He feared the Upper House
might become altogether too uppity.
He pointed out that the situation by which a Government
in the House of Representatives lacks a majority in the Senate
is frequent enough in itself to be normal. The falsification
aginst which he warned was the rejection of legislation, not the
refusal of Supply. He didn't deal with that question for one
simple reason: it just never crossed his mind that this was a
practical possibility worth arguing about.
Yet the Labor Government, the Australian administration,
Australian business and the Australian community have had to live
with this possibility since April 1973 according to the evidence
of Senator Withers, the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate,
who said in April 1974:
" We embarked on a course some 12 months ago to
bring about the House of Representatives election".
That is, for all but the first few months of the Labor Government
a new and gross element of instability and unpredictability has
been introduced into Australian political life. No important
aspect of our political or economic system has remained
unaffected by it.
It may be true that hanging concentrates the mind
wonderfully but it is not generally regarded as good for the
morale or the health.
We can see in retrospect that the election campaign of
1974 and its long drawn-out aftermath interrupted for more than
four months the normal business of the nation and, at a critical
time, diverted the attention of the planners, whether they were
in Government, in administration, in finance or in business, from
crucial matters relating to the economy to purely political
pre-occupations. One should not think that administrators in Government
can divorce themselves from the preoccupations of their political
associates least of all in so political and politicised a
capital as Canberra. The fact is that during political crises,
decision-making in Australia virtually halts. This regularly and
properly happens when there is a normal election in the normal
course of events that is each three years. To make this turmoil
endemic, to threaten it each six months, is thoroughly destructive
of good administration and good government.
The present Australian Government is the only Government
since Federation and the only Government in the English-speaking
world to have been placed in this situation. I confine my remarks
in this context to the political consequences, the direct
consequences, of the continuing threat by the Senate to refuse
Supply. It's not to my present purpose to deal at length or in / 9 
-9-
detail with the Senate's record of legislative obstruction the
score of key bills which have failed to pass. In passing, however,
I mention two aspects of that obstruction, both related to the
concept of the mandate, as I see it, and the proper working of
democracy, as Sir Robert Menzies saw it.
The legislation rejected in the Senate was foreshadowed
in 1972 and repeated in the 1974 campaign. Much of it was put
as long ago as 1969. These Bills are not ring-ins. They are not
to be dismissed just as Whitlam's whims. I put this proposition:
if a matter is thrashed out in three campaigns and throughout the
intervening years, and if the proposals which a Party has put on
those matters are endorsed by sufficient Australians to result
in that Party being elected, surely in the name of anything that can
pass for democracy, that Party in Government is entitled to claim
a mandate for such proposals. More, is not that Party obliged
as a Government to try to implement such proposals? That has
been the background, the basis put in 1969, in 1972, in 1974
of so much of the legislation now stalled or rejected by the
Senate. Reflect that Medibank itself would not now exist if
the Senate had had its way. Medibank exists only because of the
double dissolution of 1974 and our subsequent ability to get
the legislation through at the Joint Sitting.
Furthermore, for all the present pretensions of the Senate,
for all the Hamlet-like approach of the Leader of the Opposition
to what he will or will not do about the refusal of Supply,
the fact remains that while the Government did not obtain a
majority of the Senate seats in the Double Dissolution, it did
obtain a majority of votes for the Senate over all the Parties
then represented in the Senate a majority of 43,000 over the
Liberal Party, the Country Party, the Democratic Labor Party,
combined. A majority of seats in the House of Representatives;
a majority of votes in the Senate is this or is it not a mandate
to govern? Yet on specific legislation forming an integral part
of the policy put at these elections and on its basic right to
govern, the legitimacy of this Government is challenged month
by month, day by day.
So for most of the period of our Government we have had
to live with an unprecedented political problem. Equally,
there has been the problem of world-wide economic difficulties.
As I said before, our program was predicated on certain assumptions
about internal growth and the strength of the world economy. We
had devised a program of social reform designed to catch up
with a backlog, as we perceived it, created by 23 years of
conservative rule. We were concerned that so wealthy a country
as Australia, which had once been a pioneer and leader in social
reform, should have fallen so far behind. I had stated our
belief in these terms in the 1969 policy speech:
" We make these assertions: firstly, that Australians
should not be deprived of opportunities which citizens
of every comparable country enjoy. Secondly, there is
every reason why Australia, wealthy and well-endowed,
in many respects incomparably so, should be giving a
lead to other nations in the equality of opportunities
and the quality of the opportunities we make for our
own citizens and in the help we can give to others.
Twenty years ago, Australia was indeed a pioneer and a
leader: now we lag behind." 
It should be remembered however that that period of
conservative rule in Australia coincided with an extraordinarily
protracted period of world economic growth. The world had enjoyed
a virtually uninterrupted boom of twenty years. In general, a
relatively high rate of growth was accompanied by a relatively low
rate of inflation. Through most of that period Australia shared
both these characteristics of the world economy. Although in 1972
the Australian economy was already showing the signs of the twin
problems of inflation and unemployment, with a poor growth rate
which was subsequently to become world wide, the great
catastrophes about to fall on the international economy were not
foreseen. With hindsight we should perhaps have foreseen the
inevitable economic consequences of the way in which the United
States chose to finance the war in Vietnam. We could not, however,
have foreseen the energy crisis of 1973.
I know that it is now considered in some quarters to be
mean-spirited, to be buck-passing, for an Australian Minister to
mention international economic problems or to make international
comparisons, or to explain any of our economic problems whatsoever
in international terms. But these international problems remain
a fact of life and, whether we like it or not, they affect our
national life.
When my Government was elected our aim was to finance
our new programs from growth. But world-wide inflation and
recession frustrated this objective. This is no mere selfjustification.
The whole industrialised world is currently going
through the worst peacetime inflation on record and the deepest
recession since the 1930' s. Within the OECD, the membership of
which includes virtually every industrialised country in the
world, the average rate of inflation jumped from 3.9 per cent
per annum in the decade 1962 to 1972, to 7.9 per cent in 1973
and 13.4 per cent in 1974. Real Gross National Product which
ros e at the rate of 5.4 per cent per annum in the decade to 1972
declined slightly for the OECD countries as a whole in 1974 and is
expected to show a decline of about 1.5 per cent in 1975.
The OECD Economic Outlook stated on 17 July 1975:
" The present recession in OECD countries is the most
serious since the war. It is remarkable not only for its length
and depth a third consecutive half-year of negative growth
has now been recorded for the area as a whole but also for its
widespread nature: virtually every OECD country grew by less
than its medium-term average rate in 1974, and no economy is
expected to take up slack in 1975. The margin of idle resources
in the OECD area is now the largest in the post-war period, with
unemployment at record levels. The forecasts presented in the
December Economic Outlook, and to a greater extent those being made
at that time by national authorities, proved to be too optimistic.
Industrial output in the major countries fell very sharply in the
last quarter of 1974 and the first quarter of this year. The extent
and simultaneous nature of the decline was unlike anything recorded
in the post-war period. The combined GNP of the major countries,
which was thought at the time to have increased marginally in the
second half of 1974, is now estimated to have fallen, at an annual
rate, by over one per cent. Output was expected to continue
stagnating in the first half of this year; it may in fact have
fallen at an annual rate of about five per cent. The December
Economic Outlook gave reasons for supposing that the balance of
uncertainties attaching to the forecasts was on the downside; but
the extent to which this proved to be the case is astonishing." / 11 
-11-
There is no way in which Australia could have escaped
being caught up in these disruptive world-wide economic developments.
We are after all a major trading company, . so what happens to
our major trading partners the United States, Japan and the
United Kingdom is bound to affect us. It is estimated that in
the course of the recession industrial production fell by
per cent in Japan, by over 14 per cent in the United States and
by over 8 per cent in the United Kingdom. Even West Germany,
which has ridden out this storm better than most, suffered a fall
in industrial production of over 11 per cent. What is more, these
declines should be viewed against strong upward trends previously
existing at least for the Japan and West Germany; on this
basis the loss of potential output has been much greater than
these figures imply.
What is not widely recognised is that Australia has
fared comparatively well among the industrialised countries during
this period of economic turmoil. Our unemployment has been a
great deal lower than that suffered by a number of industrialised
countries; our loss of production has been less; and many
industrialised countries have had much more severe inflation.
Unlike most industrialised countries, we have moreover been
entirely free of balance of payments problems.
In spite of our economic problems the Australian employee
has on balance done well over the last two years. Average
minimum award rates have risen by 55 per cent and average earnings
by 48 per cent while the cost of living as measured by the CPI
has increased by 32 per cent. There have, therefore, been
substantial real gains to wage and salary earners, supplemented
by improved education, health., and other benefits by this
Government. There is a widespread expectation that 1976 will see
strong economic recovery across the world, accompanied by a
continued slowdown in the rate of inflation. It is important that
Australia should participate in both. There is a widespread view
that, to the extent that inflation is not contained, the recovery
may not be a sustained one. I share this view. I am convinced
that we must get inflation down to an acceptable level in
Australia, all the more if other countries with which we trade
and compete in world markets do so.
I again acknowledge the awful impropriety of my making
international comparisons. I'll have to bear that cross. But
despite everything let me make this assertion: while Australia
shares to a greater or less extent these economic problems, while
in some respects we are making a better fist of dealing with them than
some other nations, we are alone in this that while dealing
with very difficult, with unprecedentedly complex economic problems
which all nations share, we have made significant and enduring
advances in social reform, in so changing the structure of welfare
in this nation as to be of permanent benefit to future generations
. when the problems of the present are but a vague and distant memory.
Our goal now is to consolidate the reforms instituted in
the past two and a half years.
The 1975-76 [ Budget which the Treasurer, iIr Hayden, will
introduce into Parliament next week will be a major step towards
this goal. In spite of the urgency we see in proceeding with our
programs, we have decided to slow down the rate of increase in
outlays this year. Let me emphasise that, contrary to a lot of
ill-informed comment, we are not going to reduce expenditure, but
/ 12 
-12-
to slow down the rate of increase. Our expenditures will still
increase in money terms and in real terms, but less rapidly than
would otherwise have been the case.
One effect should be to leave room for the private sector
of the economy to expand, to play its proper role in the recovery.
Another effect will be to moderate the extent to which the
Australian Government's budget generates monetary expansion.
A slowdown in the rate of monetary expansion is clearly essential
if inflation is to be brought under control.
It is not appropriate, however, for me to say too much
about the Budget at this stage, beyond that it will be a responsible
budget consistent with out long term objectives of reform, with
consolidation of what we have already achieved, and with progress
towards a stable, growing economy. What I can speak of, however,
are our plans stretching beyond this Budget.
We plan, and I use the word advisedly, to review our
programs and commitments to ensure that, in total and in each
category, our expenditures will be consistent with our overall
objectives for the economy and will consolidate the vast new
programs we have introduced.
We have to look carefully at the question of what
proportion of the resources available in the economy should be
directed through the Australian Government's Budget and how these
resources should best be allocated between the various programs
of the Government. I see this task as having immediate priority.
All new programs and proposals will have to be assessed against
and accommodated within this framework.
Now is a time for consolidation, evaluation planning
for the future with an appropriate balance between welfare and
economic responsibility. Policy must always reflect our concern
for those in want; it must choose the most effective and
efficient means to that end.
We have striven to reform the overall structure of the
Australian economy. In our first year in office, before Australia
was engulfed in the world-wide economic turmoil, we pushed ahead
with the revaluation of the Australian currency and tariff reductions
and removed a number of anachronistic subsidies and taxation
concessions which operated to support less efficient industries.
We replaced the aged Tariff Board machinery with the more up-to-date
and broadly constituted Industries Assistance Commission. Trade
Practices Legislation has been passed and a Trade Practices
Commission established to protect the consumer and enhance
competition. I have no doubt that, in the long run, the Australian
economy will benefit greatly from these measures.
We shall certainly continue to maintain proper exchange
rates and tariff policies. We have made clear our resolve to
encourage and assist the Arbitration Commission to maintain a
wages policy consistent with the slowdown in the rate of inflation,
while protecting the position of wage and salary earners in this
country. / 13 
-13-
In the context of arbitration, it is difficult to take
into account the immensely enhanced value of services now provided
by the ccinmunity and no longer provided from incomes. I mention
in particular the Schools Commission in school year 1974 and
onwards, Medibank in fiscal year 1975-76 and onwards.
We are now in the process of adjusting our fiscal policies
to ensure that they will now and in the long run contribute to
the stability of the economy. Through the Reserve Bank and the
banking system we shall maintain responsible monetary policies
which ensure that credit is available, as needed, for the
development of the Australian economy but that the monetary system
is not awash with liquidity in a way which permits and even promotes
inflation. We must all recognise that the path to price stability
and full employment will not be a short one. We certainly
cannot hope to get there in 1975-76. It is important, however,
to make quite sure that we get on that path and stay on it.
Our aim is to consolidate what we have done, to plan ahead
to produce an environment conducive to economic growth, and
thereby to produce the means of completing the task we set ourselves,
and which we were elected to carry out.
An essential part of the consolidation relates to the
provision of income security for all Australians. When we camne
to power in 1972 there was need for immediate improvement in
welfare services. Considerable progress has been made to effect
that improvement. Further improvements of a more fundamental
kind are needed. To assist in determining new directions, the
Government has a number of expert reports which will form the
basis of a review process over the next year.
We have the reports of the Woodhouse Committee and the
legislation arising from it which the Senate hasreviewed and inxotedupon.
We have some of the reports of the Henderson Inquiry into Poverty.
We have the interim report of the Hancock Inquiry on National
Superannuation, and the final report is expected within the next
few weeks. We have a report from the Priorities Review Staff
canvassing issues raised in the inquiries already mentioned and
discussing possibilities for social welfare reform in Australia.
We are expecting a report later in the year from Mr Justice Toose
on Repatriation. The Asprey Report on Taxation also needs to
be mentionedt there is, of course, a very close relationship
between reforms in the welfare and taxation areas.
Two of the reports I have just mentioned the Henderson
and PRS reports will be released before the end of this month.
They both draw attention to a number of problems which need
attention and to a variety of possible solutions to those problems.
They are reports which require the most careful examination by
the Government. They are reports which I hope will stimulate
public debate and public contribution of a kind which will assist
the Government in taking decisions on them in due course.
Against that background, the Government has decided that
a full year should be set aside in which, in the light of published
expert reports, to develop an equal, fair and workable income
security system for Australia. The review will be conducted by
the Government itself, with Ministers closely directing the work
undertaken and reviewing the progress at regular intervals. / 14
I 
-14-
By the time of the 1976-77 Budget I expect the Government
will be in a position to determine its long term program of reform
in the welfare area and the steps which will need to be
progressively taken to achieve those reforms.
The new Budget attempts to be as relevant to the
implementation of the Labor program as its two predecessors. In
the framing of those Budgets, we were concerned about priorities,
the priorities of meeting needs as we saw them, the priorities
of reaching towards goals as we saw them.
The common ground of economic debate between the parties
today is the need to reduce the rate of growth of government
spending. The present Leader of the Opposition makes no specific
proposals about what cuts should be made, while the Leader of
the other Party proposes only more subsidies and new spending.
The Leader of the Opposition's most recent predecessor did at
least make a specific proposal: it was to make percentage cuts
across the board. We have not taken that course because it
avoids the basic task for a Government the task of determining
priorities. In this Budget you will find that we have been as
much concerned about getting our priorities right in circumstances
of great difficulty and complexity as we tried to do when both
national And international circumstances permitted us a far
wider range of options.
The abiding challenge for statesmanship in a democracy is
to try to get the priorities right and to resolve the conflicting
demands about priorities in the context of the desirable and the
possible, the politically possible, the economically possible.
The nature of our Australian society is such that everyone
in politics or government is faced with an ever-increasing range
of demands from the articulate, from the powerful, and equally
inescapable demands and hopes from the less articulate, the least
powerful, that their priorities are the ones which should be adopted.
A remarkably permanent aspect of our Australian society
and Australian history is that for all our sense of independence,
for all our ability to improvise, to take initiatives, our demands
for action always turn into demands for Government action, for
Government assistance. At this very moment, almost every demand
for the protection of free enterprise, for the enhancement of
business freedom, is couched in terms of Government assistance
a subsidy, a quota, a tariff.
It has ever been thus. From the beginning, when we in
Australia have spoken about national priorities, we have really
meant priorities set for the nation by the Government.
Australian political debate has always been extremely vehement.
The peculiar vehemence of Australian political debate
has always been about priorities set by the Government of the day,
whether elected or appointed. One only needs recall that one of
the principal charges against Macquarie, one of the principal
items used to discredit him in the Bigge Report, was the building
of the Obelisk which still stands in what is now Macquarie Place
as the measure of distance from all places out of Sydney. It was
charged against Macquarie-that he had got his priorities wrong.
Those who govern Australia are still accused of trying to build
monuments, when their real wish is to get Australians priorities
right, right for the present and right for generations ahead. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR E. G. WHITLAM,
AT THE GURINDJI LAND CEREMONY ON 16 AUGUST 1975
Vincent Lingiari and men and women of the Gurindji people.
On this great day, I, Prime Minister of Australia,
speak to you on behalf of the Australian people all those
who honour and love this land we live in.
For them I want to say to you:
First, that we congratulate you and those who shared
your struggle, on the victory you have achieved 9 years after
you walked off Wave Hill Station in protest.
I want to acknowledge that we Australians have still
much to do to redress the injustice and oppression that has
for so long been the loss of Black Australians.
I want to promise you that this act of restitution
which we perform today will not stand alone your fight was
not for yourselves alone and we are determined that Aboriginal
Australians everywhere will be helped by it.
I want to promise that, through their Government, the
people of Australia will help you in your plans to use this
land fruitfully for the Gurindji.
And I want to give back to you formally in Aboriginal
and Australian Law ownership of this land of your fathers.
Vincent Lingiari I solemnly hand to you these deeds
as proof, in Australian law, that these lands belong
to the Gurindji people and I put into your hands part
of the earth itself as a sign that this land will be
the possession of you and your children forever.
DAGURAGU, 16 August 1975 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER,
THlE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, QC, MP,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL,
NORTH RYDE, N. S. W., 22 AUGUST 1975
1. 1 give full credit to John Gorton for recognising the
needs of the Australian film and television industry.
We agree on the need to develop an industry of world
standard. We agree that a flourishing film and TV
industry is possible only with a pool of expert trained
technicians and craftsmen, of creative producers, directors
and scriptwriters. That is what this school is providingalong
with lectures, seminars, workshops and information
on all aspects of film and TV production for those involved
in the industry.
2. It is seven years since a school such as this was f4 rst
proposed at a UNESCO seminar on film and TV training
at the University of N. S. W. I am proud that my Government
was able to follow up these initiatives and establish
the Film and Television School as an independent statutory
authority in 1973. The School has the same status as a
college of higher education. Eight months ago you invited
me to open the first full-time three-year course of -the
School. 1 regret that I was not able to be with you on
that occasion, but I know that the first courses have
successfully begun. It is a very select group -only 24
stu~ dents a year it's smaller than the Cabinet -but
those men and women have been carefully chosen and will be
trained to the highest standards of excellence, of professionalism.
3. Professor Toeplitz and your Council have recognised the
essential truth that the Australian film and TV industry
can only survive and prosper by producing works of
international quality. There is no room for mediocrity.
Here you have the very finest equipment and technical
facilities; by 1980 you will have a permanent new
building at Macquarie University. But none of these things
will be of" much value if the standards of professional
training are inferior. The success of this School
depends, not only on cultivating a technically stimulating
atmosphere, but on attaining and insisting upon rigorous
professional standards in all your work. Technical
competence in film production is only apparent by its
absence; its presence is taken for granted. Too often in
Australian productions in the past we have been aware of
a certain clumsiness, a certain roughness at the edges.
It is difficult to pin down but we can recognise it.
True excellence of style and technique must be taught and
learnt the hard way. In film and TV productions it involves
collaboration by many different people with many different
skills. Here in this school you will have the benefit
of working together and getting used to the discipline of
working together. That is an essential part of the training
this School provides. ./ 2 
4. Films and television are the authentic art forms of
the 20th century the most popular, and therefore also
the most representative art forms, and those most
closely attuned to the thoughts and feelings of the
people. The problem is that they involve technical
resources and expenditures beyond the reach of individuals
or even of substantial private companies. Writing and
painting and composing were solitary arts and could be
practised in penury, but films and television require
heavy investment and advanced technology. In the days
when the technology was relatively simple and investments
were modest Australia could afford a successful, and
indeed flourishing, film industry. Overseas markets
were limited, but the overheads were such that costs
could be recouped and profits made from local exhibition.
This is no longer the case. For years we heard demands
and appeals for a viable film industry in Australia.
These hopes were not fulfilled because Governments were
never prepared to accept any responsibility for film
production. It is only now that Governments are playing
their part by subsidising film production and supporting
their own production agencies. We now recognise that in
a small or medium-sized country maintaining film
production is like running an orchestra or an art gallery;
it has little chance of succeeding without Government
support. I am not suggesting that a profitable private
industry is impossible. I am suggesting that without
Government support a profitable industry is difficult
tc establish and unlikely to succeed. moreover, it is only
with Government support that films can be produced for
a minority audience. There is less pressure on film
makers to4-c onform to cosmopolitan and frequently debased
standards of popular taste. There is more scope for a
distinctively Australian style.
We can all take satisfaction for the success of many
recent Australian films. We have seen a healthy expansion
of the Australian film industry in recent years. This has
been due in large part to the involvement of governments.
The Australian Government, as you know, has established,
the Australian FiLm Commission as a statutory authority
to Promocte a healthy Australian film industry. The
Commission will incorporate Film Australian ( the Government's
film production unit) and the Australian Film Development
CorporatiLon -another offspring of the Gorton Government.
The Corporation this year committed about $ 1.5 million
to Australian film projects.
6. The Labor Party is committed to a high level of Australian
content in television production. We have established
the Australia Council as an independent authority with its
Film, Radio and Television Board to supervise Australian
Government assistance to film and -television projects. And
now we have a fully-fledged Film and Television School to
produce the qualified men and women that the industry will need.
I am delighted to be with you to perform this opening
ceremony. I congratulate the director, Professor Toeplitz
and the council and staff of the School on the excellent start
it has made. I am confident that it will make an indispensable
contribution to the development of film and -television
in Australia. 



SPEECH NOTES FOR PRIME MINISTER, FOR OPENING OF ST BASIL'S HOMES,
LOURANTOS VILLAGE, LAKENBA, N, S. W,
23 AUGUST 1975
1. IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE INDEED TO BE PRESENT FOR
THE OFFICIAL OPENING AND BLESSING OF THIS MAGNIFICENT
LOURANTOS VILLAGE WHICH OPERATES UNDER THE AUSPICES
OF THE GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH FIFTH LARGEST DENOMINATION
IN AUSTRALIA. YOU HAVE AS YOUR PATRON His EMINENCE
ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS WHO HAS ONLY BEEN IN THIS
COUNTRY SINCE APRIL THIS YEAR, BUT WHO FEELS SO FIRMLY
COMMITTED TO THE PASTORAL NEEDS OF GREEK-BORNUSTRALIANS
THAT HE ! NTENDS TO SEEK AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP.
AUSTRALIA IS HONOURED BY HIS INTENTION. I CAN ASSURE
THE RESIDENTS, THE DIRECTORS, THE SUPPORTERS OF
-ST BASIL'S HOMES THAT YOUR PATRON IS HERE TO STAY.
2. 1 WAS ANXIOUS TO MEET ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE AFTER HIS ARRIVAL, BECAUSE I FELT I HAD SO
MUCH TO TALK TO HIM ABOUT FOLLOWING MY VISIT TO CRETE
IN JANUARY THIS YEAR. QUITE APART FROM ALL THE TIES
OF AUSTRALIA TO GREECE THROUGH OUR IMMIGRATION PROGRAMS,
I HAD LEARNED THIS HIS FATHER HAD SERVED ALONGSIDE
AUSTRALIAN SERVICEMEN IN CRETE DURING THE SECOND WORLD
WAR. WHILE I WAS RETURNING FROM DARWIN, MY WIFE VISITED THE
SITE OF THE BATTLE AND CEMETRY AT RETHYMNON WHERE THE
TOWNSPEOPLE ARE ERECTING A MEMORIAL TO THAT AUSTRALIAN
PRESENCE, AND SHE WAS DEEPLY MOVED BY THE EVIDENCE OF
THE CONTINUING TIES OF FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN OUR PEOPLES./ 2 -ILQ4 
I
3. ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS, ACCOMPANIED BY MR SAMIOS, A DIRECTOR
OF ST BASIL'S HOMES, LUNCHED WITH ME AT THE LODGE AT THE
END OF IT WILL NOT SURPRISE YOU TO LEARN THAT
THEY TALKED AT LENGTH ABOUT THIS GREAT SOCIAL UNDERTAKING
HERE AT LOURANTOS VILLAGE3
I EXPRESSED MY OWN INTEREST IN THE PROJECT, BECAUSE OF
MY OWN CONCERN AT THE NEED TO PROVIDE LOVING CARE AND
ACCOMMODATION FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE WHO HAVE SPENT THEIR
LIVES IN THE SERVICE OF THEIR FAMILIES, OF THEIR
COMMUNITIES, OF THEIR HOMELANDS, AND WHO DESERVE THE
ATTENTION AND CARE OF THE COMMUNITY. I KNEW T-AT THE
AUSTRALIAN ' GOVERNMENT HAD CONTRIBUTED TO THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF LOURANTOS VILLAGE UNDER THE AGED PERSONS HOMES AND
HOSTELS ACTS.
BUT I REALISED ESPECIALLY THAT THIS GREAT UNDERTAKING
TO PROVIDE ACCOMMODATION FOR OVER 80 ELDERLY PEOPLE
ø.. UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH
ALTHOUGH IN ITS CHARITY IT IS NON-DENOMINATIONAL REPRESENTS
THE COMMITMENT OF THE GREEK COMMUNITY IN AUSTRALIA TO
ALL THOSE WHO NEED CARE IN OUR COMMUNITY, WHATEVER
THEIR COUNTRY OF ORIGIN OR CHOICE,
4, SO I WAS DELIGHTED TO ACCEPT THE INVITATION EXTENDED
THROUGH YOUR DIRECTOR, MR SAMIOS, AND YOUR PATRON,
ARCHBISHOP STYLIANOS, TO SHARE THIS OCCASION WITH YOU.
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT WE ARE HERE TOGETHER, CHURCH AND
STATE, BECAUSE OF THE CO-OPERATION THERE IS BETWEEN
CHURCH AND STATE IN THIS COUNTRY IN ALL AREAS OF SOCIAL...
RESPONSIBILITY BUT ESPECIALLY THAT OF CARE FOR THE3Aft, 
THIS IS THE FOURTH OLD PEOPLES HOME I HAVE OPENED IN
NEW SOUTH ' WALES IN THE LAST THREE MONTHS. ALL HAVE
RECEIVED SUBSTANTIAL GRANTS FROM THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT WHICH IS ANXIOUS TO PROVIDE MAXIMUM ASSISTANCE
TO THOSE PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE ORGANISATIONS BEST
FITTED AND MOST COMPASSIONATELY MOTIVATED IN THIS AREA
OF CARE FOR THE AGED.
I AM SURE THAT LOURANTOS VILLAGE WILL BE A PLACE OF
COMFORTING AND COMFORTABLE INDEPENDENCE FOR ALL THOSE.
'' WHO COME TO LIVE HERE. I KNOW THAT THE PERSONAL
INVOLVEMENT OF THOSE CONNECTED WITH ST BASIL'S HOMES WILL
EASE MANY OF THOSE INITIAL FEELINGS OF ISOLATION WHICH
CAN MAR THIS PARTICULAR KIND OF " MOVING HOUSE", AND
:: LL PROVIDE INTEESTED COMPANIONSHIP IN THE YEARS
AHEAD. CERTAINLY THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT'S GRANT
CF $ 1,234,000 IS JUSTIFIED AND CAN BE SEEN AS AN
INVESTMENT, ' NOT IN MONETARY TERMS, BUT IN THE SERENITY
AND HAPPINESS OF THE RESIDENTS AT THEIR NEW ADDRESS,
IN THEIR NEW HOME.
6. IT MUST BE A GREAT JOY FOR MR NICHOLAS LOURANTOS TO BE
HERE TODAY TO SEE SO MANY OF HIS OWN DREAMSREALISED,
BECAUSE HE HAS BEEN SUCH A GREAT BENEFACTOR TO THIS
CHARITY. AND IT IS FITTING THAT THIS COUNTRY SHOULD
NOW HAVE A LOURANTOS VILLAGE TO COMMEMORATE A MAN
CALLED NICHOLAS LOURANTOS WHO LEFT HIS HOMELAND, THE
ISLAND OF TSIRIGO, TO COME TO A NEW LAND OVER SIXTY-FIVE
YEARS AGO. THAT NEW LAND, AUSTRALIA, HAS BEEN ENRICHED
BY HIS COMING, AND MEMORIES OF HIS HOMELAND LIVE ON 4.. 
-4-
THROUGH HIS PART IN THE ENDOWMENT OF THE CHAIR OF
MODERN GREEK AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY. IT'S A
LITTLE LATE FOR ME OF COURSE; I STILL CLING TO THE
CLASSICS. BUT GENERATIONS OF YOUNGER AS WELL AS
OLDER GREEK-SPEAKING RESIDENTS OF AUSTRALIA WILL
REMEMBER NlICHOLAS LOURANTOS FOR HIS PHILANTHROPY,
FOR HIS CHARITY,
7, IN THIS CONTEXT IT IS INTERESTING TO REFLECT ON THE
TIES BETWEEN THE OLDER GENERATIONS OF OUR HOMELANDS,
IN THE YEAR 1974-75,' 3,334 AGED OR OTHERWISE DEPENDENT
PARENTS WERE NOMINATED FOR ENTRY TO AUSTRALIA, ROM
GREECE, AN" D 4,837 WERE NOMINATED FOR ENTRY AS NONDEPENDENT
PARENTS. THE URGE FOR FAMILY REUNION IS
IMMENSE AND GRATIFYING, IT IS AN INDICATION OF THE
E/ TENT TO HjICH AUSTRALIA HAS BECOME HOME FOR A
YOUNGER GENERATION. BUT ALSO A REMINDER OF THE PHYSICAL
DISTANCE SEPARATING US FROM OUR EUROPEAN HERITAGE.
I WAS ACUTELY CONSCIOUS OF THIS ON MY VISIT TO
GREECE AND OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES EARLIER THIS YEAR.
IT MADE ME ALL THE HAPPIER FOR MY GOVERNMENT'S MOVE
TO INTRODUCE PORTABILITY OF PENSIONS OVERSEAS, AT
PRESENT AUSTRALIAN SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS ARE GOING
TO 571 AGED PENSIONERS LIVING IN GREECE, 316 INVALID
PENSIONERS, 149 WIVES AND 149 WIDOWS AND 7 SUPPORTING
MOTHERS, OF THIS TOTAL OF 1,192, 484 HAD CONNECTIONS
IN NEW SOUTH WALES, MANY OF THOSE PEOPLE-WOULD BE
KNOWN TO THIS AUDIENCE. S 
AND WHO KNOWS HOW MANY OF THESE ELDERLY PEOPLE
DRAWING THE AUSTRALIAN AGE PENSION AT HOME IN GREECE
MIGHT HAVE BEEN TEMPTED TO REMAIN HERE HAD THEY BEEN
ABLE TO LOOK FORWARD TO RETIREMENT IN A PLACE LIKE
LOURANTOS VILLAGE.
I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASE INDEED IN DECLARING OPEN
THIS LATEST VENTURE OF ST BASIL'S HOMES LOURANTOS
VILLAGE. I'AY ALL WHO COME HERE ENJOY A PEACEFUL AND
HAPPY RETIREMENT, 1
ø y o
: t 



SPEECH BY THE HRilf 1EfINIiSTERT
TUE HON, E. G. WHITLAN,
FOR THE ONEThING OF THE 18THl BIENNIAL CONFEREINCE
OF THE LIBRARY ASSOCIATIo~ OF AUISTRALIA
H1E L3 OUIN~ E. 24 AUGUST 1975
ICONGRATUL ATE . THE ORGAN ISERS OF THIS CONFERENJCE O N
BRI-NGING TOGET,-]"-HER SUCH A R EP RE SETAT I~ A ND. D IST INGUISHED
* GATHERING OF LIB3RARIAiNS, ADM' N1STRATORS AIND AL L T HOSE CONCERN'ED
W IT H T iiE 2/ LOPMENTf OF LIBRARIES IN LlUS RA L IA, THE_ SIZE AND
SCOPAES SOCr" IT TY, O U% HCEF RV IGOUNRC P OFA R-EY OUER0V IDENCFES IN0C F THE NS TRETNH'\ EG THP U-OBFL IC'( O'SUR
F TE OLEr Or: IRAV IN A FREE SOCIETY,
I P3i-YEAPS THERE HAS B EN A MIARKED CHANGE IN
CTFH E 1ZEDUi. T2VV3 LrCG I CH PEDCE PTIO TO 0OFP R'OyIVHAIDTE , A LII1NBE RAN RO Y LOSNHGOEURL. D THBEIN KA N" OD F-W LHIABTR ASRO RIETS
AS CQLt rCER3 j5O OOKS, ITI O OUUHTHE t'IATERIAL'
O1R1 C S OF A L T D THAT COUNT 7IMPORTANT AS. THESE. ARE
BU: TH Ci 0UR ESARE USED AND HOGW T HE Y ARE M1ADE AVAILABLE
TO0 THOS E lWHO2-N' ED THEi', THE LIBRARY' S FUNCTION IS TO PROV/ IDE
INFO, A-f I' TB'ARIAN IS FUNCTIONI IS TO ORGANISE THAT
INFORNATIGN AND ENSURE" THAT EVERYONE HAS ACCESS TO IT, 
IHOPE THIS WI LL NOT SOUND TOO ELITIST A V/ I EWf ORA
T HE M E TOO R EMOT E FIROM YOUR P RLES ENT P R EOCC UP AT I OINS TH E
FREEDC; TO DtE iGNORANT MlAY WELL BE -AS PRECIOUS AS* THE RIGHT
TO N~ r4. DO3THOWEVER, IF LIBRARIANS WOULD ACCEPT THAT.
CCE R A' 0h NOT. IMPLY MAKE THE POINT THAT WHEREA
O3, CSRE A FUNCTION OF LITERACY.', THEY ARE RIGHTLY
S . A 3 A FU iC T nIN IF LI1B E RT Y. NOTICED THAT IN YOUR. SUBMISSION
TO THE C OMI 4T T F: G F UIRY INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES AN INQUIRY
ISHt-: AL DEAL 111T! H L'TER YOU QUOTED SOME WORDS OF ONE OF MY
FO3. ADVITSSEL LSY., L YOR OF COURSE, THE DISCIPLES QUOTE THE
:~ SERBUTIN HISCAS IQUOTE THE DISCIPLE JIM SPIGELMAN
u 1972 AT 5O) TH SUMIMER SCHOOL. OF FEASRLA
NS TlTU TE 0OF P OL TIL S C I ENC E
" REE-CM~ OF INFORIMATION IS AS VITAL TO DEMOCRACY
AS FREEDOM OF SPEECH, YET THE ORFHA EER
ATTRACTED THE SAME DEGREE OF ATTENTION OR
E. M'OTIOPN AS THE LATTER," .1/ 3 S 0
THESE FUNCTIONS ARE BASIC TO ANY CONCEPT OF T-RUE
D EOCAY LBARE THAT ARE FREE, OPEN AND ACCESSIBLEAE
JUST MUCH BASTIONS OF FREEDOM AS UNIVERSITIES OR
PARLIAMENTS. FREEDOM OF SPEECH IS A PRECIOUS FREEDOM, BUT
IT HAS A i U1CH HIGHER VALUE,, A MUCH RICHER SIGNIFICANCE, VIHEN
FREEDOil OF INFORMATION GOES WITH IT. EVERYONE HAS TfHE RIGHT
TO AN ILL-INFORM" ED1 OPINION, BUT ONLY THROUGH ACCESS TO
INFORMATION CAIN THE FIR EEDO0M TO EXPRESS OPINIONS HAVE GENUINE
VALUE, ONLY' THROUGH ACCESS TO liNFORMATION C AN FREEDOM OF
C D C f' -0 D H V D1 I % A N rT N1 A T) CM r ' D A T r Q C zTV 
IT IS ONLY LATELY THAT GOVERIiIENTS HAl~ VE COME
TO RECOGNISE THE FORCE OF THIS ARGUMIENT3 MENT1INl 1f
HERE BECAUSE IT IS RELEVANT INOT ONLY TO0 THE WORK OF YOUR
PROFESSION BUT TO ONE OFr TIHE BASIC POLICIES OF NiY
Go0V EE isi'l 1rT. THE RE I S NO0 PART OF OURI) PHILOSOPHY; NlO
PHRASE IN THE CURRENT POLITICAL VOCABULARY, SO POORLY
UNDERSTOOD AS " OPEN GoVERMEii", IT IS REGULARLY QUOTED
BACK TO ' E BY JOURNALISTS 14E.. E MINISTERS REFUSE
TO ANSWER A QUESTION AT A PRESS CONFEER-JCE OR REFUSE
TO DIVULGE THE DETAILS OF A CABINET DECISION. I SUPPOSE
IT CAN BE ARGUED THAT IN AN iD, E' AL SOCIETY THERE W4OULD
BE NO SECRETS OF ANY KIND. FOR ALL THE PROGRESS WIE
H AV. E M ADE SI iC E D EC EM 3ER 1972; 1 CONFESS THFAT THE IDEAL
SOCTY A ETT ATTA INED, SO WE SHALL HAVE TO
~. CETsoMECi= TALT I N PUBLIC AFFAIRS, By
QE G HOW EVER, WE INTEND SOME: THING DEEPER
A iD MNORE IllDPORTANT THAN CON" TEM?"', OR'AiNE'-OUS DISCLOSUREl";
MEAN TIE WIDE . ST_ POSSIBLE ACCESS TO REPORTS, TO
STATI1STICS, TO DC*% Jo=., TS, TO THE RESULTS OF OFFICIAL
CUlU TRIESJ TO FACTS, TO RECORDS OF EVERY KIND, WE PlEAN
SOMEITHING NO R E PEi OUS GOVE~ rNME'l\ lNTS FREQUENTLY AVOIDED
RESPONSI3I1LITY FOR CERTAIN THINGS BY SAYING THEY WERE
3. A T E PMA T TCERD\ S INEVITABLY THIS IMAT1HAT VERY
LI TTLE EXPERT PUBLI C SERV/ ICE ADVICE OR INFORMATOWA
AV. AILA8LE ON THESE SUBJECTS TO THE NATIONAL GOVERNIMENT.
BY BRINGING TOGETHER THE BEST TALENTS IN THESE AREAS.,
B_ 3Y OPEN'IN,\ G U. P THE WIDEST RA NG E OF AD'/ ICE. 1 AND BY MAKING
THAT ADVICE AVAILABLE TO ALL. WE HAVE VASTLY WIDENED
THE VOLUME OF PUBLIC INFORtMATION, LIBRARIES AND
LIBRARIANS HAVE HELPED IN THAT PROCESS, ~ i S I . dll 
3A.
OPEN GO-VERNMENTS t" EANS FREEDOM 0O: INFORMATION. AS
SURELY AS THE PARLIAMENT ENSHRINES., DEFENDS AND
MAINTAINS THE-FREEDOM OF SPEECH.) THE LIBRARY ENSHRINES,
D EFE N DS AND 11A IN TA. NS T HE FREDOM 0OFINFORMATION1 
IN MlY POLICY SPEECH INf, 197 2 1 DEF-INi-D LABOR'S BASIC
O3J'ECTIVES IN THESE TERMS
TO PROMOTE EQUALITY i
TO INVOLVE-THE PEOPLE OF IN THE DECISIONMAKING
PROCESSES
TO LIBERATE THE TALENTS AND UPLIFT THE HORI1ZONS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
QUITE CLEARLY THE FULFILMENT OF THESE OBJECTIVES.
DEPNDSON THE CULTIV'[' ATION OFr A ORE AWARE A" ND BETTERIOME
ELETORTEII~ MLR PPOTUNTIS IN EDUCATION ARE A LONG-TR
A\ SPE-CT OF ' THIS PROCESS, IN TH E SHORT TERM IT IS CLEAR THAT.
BETTE'R LIRrY AND ' INFORMATION SERVICES, PROPERLY ORGAN ISED
; DEQUATEL Y F; ED CN RAISE THE-LEVELS OF-KfNO!' llEDGc
~ IC ANiDL r-SOP H ISTICATION IN SOCIETY, IF PEOPLE ARE
TO 4 E I' LV. L) iU' T&gt; CISION-MAKING PROCESS THEY MUST KiNOWi
L~ 4 ~ CTSIONSARE ANDu HOW POLITICAL ISSUES CAN B3E JUDGED,
LI RE S M-ItU T IN THIS PROCESS, AN INFORMED COMMUNITY
ETTER EQU IPPED TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DEMOCRATIC PROCESS#
T " ILE RA. E~~ TAI EIITS ANT) UPLIFT THE HORIZOS O H
T AN PEO PLE iT S ES SE NT IAL THA T PLE BE AWARE OF. THE*
T~ ORU1II~, THE PO'NS3! 3ILITJES FOR B0ETTERMENT AND PEFOP " MJ
THE FAIITYOF CHNETHAT COMES FROM A GRASP OF CURRENT
A. FAIRS I. N'FOROMED AND ENRICHED BY A KNO' 4' _ EDGE OF HISTORY, HERE
AGA"% il THE LIBRARY, AS TiHE PRIMARY SOURCE OF INFORMATION, HAS A
CENTPAL ROLE TO PLAY, 
FORp A RIEFORMING GoVElINiNENT THEREAi OBSVIOUS
DEFICITENC! VS IN THE LIB3RARY SERVICES POVIDED IN AUSTRALIA,,
THEIil hSoT-OBIOUS DEFICI ENCY LIES IN THEC" IN'EQUALITY OF THEIR
STANDARDS, STANDARDS VARY SIGNIFICANTLY FROM STATE TO STATE
ANDW TI SFA1ES AND WITHIN CITIES, IAM THINKING PARTICULARLY(
HERE OF PUBLIC. LIBRARIES.. WITH NOTABLE EXCEPTIONS PUBLIC.
LIBRARY STANDARDS IN AUSTRALIA ARE LOWER THAN THOSE I1N MAM4Y
OTHER OUTESOF COMPARATIVE ', iEALTH, PUBLIC LIBRARIES R
THE BASIC RESPONSIBSILITY OF LOCAjL GO'IERN IENT AUTHORITIES0
WHC = EC:-' TIVE ASSISTANCE FROM STATE GOVERNMENTS, GENERALLY
SP EAKI fG THAT ASSI1STAN*) CE HAS BENINADEQUATE, LOCAL. AUTHORITIES
HAVE THEIR---T-o 001 4N F INANCI AL PROBE) 13 r-ND THIE RESOURCES ALLOCATED 0
TO DUBLC Ll DRAR ZS HAVE USUALLY HAD A LOW PRITORITY,
ACY.~ D~ ThT HESSTOA TES THE SCALE OF: ASSITACE: TO
_ l ' TD RE C A 3LEi NARKEDLY INCREASED INi RECENT YEARS.,
BU YS CLEr A R&gt; A S7-rRIES OF A" THOR1TATIVE RE P ORT S OVER
YEARS~ A OVERALL STANDARDS IN PUBLIC: LIBRARIES
AR U TOO LO4, CETAINLY THE TASK OF PROVIDING EFFICIENT
? U3L LLI 3DR' SE S i MUCH MOPC) E DIFFICULT IN THINLY
." ATED RURAL AESTHAN IT IS IN COiMlPACT CENTRES OF
9LTI~ oiIN ClUES IANTO) W ! 4S. THERE IS NO REASON WHY THE
CITIZCEF NS~ SOULiS D~ HAVE ACICESS TO BETTER LIBRA! t
S ER V CE S 6G EATFER F EE iDC' 1 OF I IFO0R AT 1IN' THFIANI T HE CITIZENS
oi ECHUCttfA oR GrEELOCNG. 
ONlE OF THE GOV/ ERNMENT'S CENTRAL AMBITIONS HAS BEEN
TO REDRESS I NEQUALIT IES BETWEEN REG IONS, BETWEEN CITY DWELLERS
AND RESIDENTS OF COUNTRY TOWNS, 11WEB 3ELIEVE THAT A PERSON'S~
STANDARD OF LIVING SHOULD NOT DEPEND ON WRE HE LIVES Of!
IS OBLIGED TO LIVE: WE HAVE TAKEN A NUMiBER OF STEPS TO
ALLEVIATE THE FINANCIAL POSITION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITIES AND PROVIDE MORE ADEQUATE AND UNIFORM PUBLIC
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES. FOR EXAMPLE, W/ E HAVE.
AMENDED THE GRANTS COMMISSION LEGISLATION TO ENABLE THE
COINMISSION TO RCOMN;. END-GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT 0444
T 2AT'~ LREDRESS SREGIONAL INEQUALITIES IN THE SAMiWAY THAT
* INEQUALITIES 2ETWEEN STATES HAVE BEEN ALLEVIATED. LAST'
FINANCIA'' L YEA $ 56 i'lILLION W/ AS ALLOCATED TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Bouvs; IN i975-76 ALMOST $ 80 MILLION WILL BE GRANTED
7 ZZE GRANTS S-V. ULD DO MUCH TO IMPROVE LOCAL LIBRARIES:
I~ * ADITIO 1, 7HROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AND REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT, THE GOVERMMENT IS DIRECTLY ASSISTING' SOME
LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN THE PROVIJSION OF LIBRARY SERVICES. 
InM, A. RC H THIS YEAR I ANN-OUNCED THE APPOIN.\ TMENT
OF A WIIDE-RANGING COMMl" 1ITTEE OF INQUWIRY INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
IN AUSTRA LI A. [ HERE HAS BEE. N A FULL NT ENCOURAGING RESPONSIE
TO THIS iNQUIRuuY THE CONITTEEJ UNDER THE CHAIRMAiNSHIP OF
. LA.
HIP. R HORTON, HAS ALREADY HELD 13PUBLIC HEARINGS IN THE
STATE CAPITALS, CANBERRA AND DARWIN AND 11' MOIRE HEARINGS IN
REGONL CNTES. IT HAS RECEIVE~ D SOME 350 WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS,
INCLUDING AN4 EXTENSIV/ E AND VALUABLE SUBM" ISSION FROjM YOUR OW4N
ASSOCIATION, WHTWE. ARE SEEKING ARE NOT JUST MORE BOOKS OR
BETTER BUILDINGS BUT A COMPIREHEINSIVE NAT IONAL I NFORII
POLICY, THi.: E IS A L N-TERiMy il D TO C-ORDINATE ANDj.
RATIONALISE ALL L IB R ARY SERVICES, THE RE I S SOI'ME IRONY I N THE
F A CT T HAT C H LD REN OFTEN HAVE A" CCESS TO BETTER LIBRARY SERVICES
* r:~ THEIR PAREllNTS. IN ANY ARE'S THE ONLY LIBRARIES OP ANY*
DID ARE THOSE IN SCHOliOLS. I SOM AEAS THERE I S INOT E VEIN
A S.-Li" OI_ LIBRA" IRY WfiORTHYi OF THE COINSIDERABLE
AUSTlRALliA_. N GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE H,-AS GOIN'E TO SCHOOL AND
TERTIAIRY EDUCATIONAL LIBRARIES BU. LT VERY LITTLE TO PUBLIC
L 1BRA R I ES C LE-A RL Y THERE IS A NEED TO CO-O1RDINATE THE FUNDING
OF SCHOO-3L A111 ' 3 i~ i:' AL LIB-2RARY SEDVICES 11,1 TlHE PE-ST RESULTS ARE'
To PPE ACHIEVED, AGAIN, THE WORK OF CATALOGUlING LliBRARY
MlATER IAL., COMPI LIN.' G B IBLI OGRAPH IES AND REFERENCE SYSTEMS,'-is
FREQUEINTLY DUI-PLICATED IN MIANY LIBRARIESI THERE IS A NEED TO
EXAMINE 1WHETHER A CENTRAL CATALOGUING AND IN1DEXING SERVICE IS'
cEOFR IIN8 TEEAE THE SORT OF QUESTIONS THAT NUST BE
ANSWERED IN EVALUATING THE EFFrECTI'/ ENESS OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES3
AND DETERMINING THE B'EST M" IETHOD OF FUNDING THEM, 
_ 78-* ISHOUL D MENTION A FURTHER INITIATIVE INi THE
DIEVELOPMEN-r OF" A NATIOiNAL INFORH1ATION SERVICE, EARLY LAST
YEAR rH~ E GOVEiRNMEiNT APIPOINTED AN INTER-DEPART'MENTAL COMMITTEE
TO CONSIDER THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN AUSTRALIAN LIBRARY BASED
INFORMATION SERVICES THIS AROSE FROM A PROPOSAL MADE BY ' THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY. IN THE BUDGET SPEECH LAST YEAR THE THEN
TREASURER ANNOUNCED AN ALLOCATIO'N OF-MORE THAN $ 1MILLION
FOR A FEASI3ALITY. STUDY INTO THE ESALSHETOFSC
S ERIIC E A STAND ING I NTER-DEPARTMENTAL CO" M I TTEE HAS BEEN
A PPOINTED TO SUPERVISE THE SE STUDI ES, ITS INQUIRIES ARE
PROCEEDING. ~ ONE EXAiMIN ES THE RECORD OF TH Is GOVERNMENT ONE_
WILL SEE A BiROAD AND COSSETTEE-AN EMPHASIS ON THE
S F&gt; RED OF ICATOON WIDER ACrCE SS TO INFORMATION), AND
W IT HIN THIS CONTEXNT), A GIENERAL CULTIVATION OF LITERACY AND
C ULT UR E. DO NOT P. REI-TEND, 4. THAT EV/ ERYTHINIG IN THIS AREA
BEARS DIRECTLY CN TWHE WOR. K OF LIBRARIANS) BUT OUR SUPPORT
FOR LIBRARIES -A SUPPORT SPECIFICALLY PROCLAIMED IN MY
POLICY SPE EC H IN, 1,97 2 IS-P ART OF THIS PROCESS. [ HERE IS.)
FFO R EX A MP A CLEAR LINK TO BE SEENl BETWEEN OUR CONCERN FOR
THE MEDIA AND CUP, CONCERN FOR FREEDOM OtF INFORMATIO'N. a89/ 
IEVIDENCE OUR INITIAT IVES IN ACCCESS RADIO AND ETHN IC RADIO
STATIONS, INi OUR EXPANSION OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES AT
ALL LEVELS, IN THPE PRIMACY WE GIVE? TO PARLIAM~ ENT AS THE
HIHST FOGRUPI OF OPEN POLITICAL DEPBATEJ NTH STBISMN
OFITE AUSTRALIA CONCIL WITH ITS LITERATURE BOARD
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ENCOURAGEMT o F /-USTRALIAN W'RITING,
IN OUR SUPPORT FOR AUTHORS THROUGH THME GRANTING OF A PUBLIC
LEIND ING RI GHT, IN THE LIBERALISATION OF CIENSORSHIP, IN OURGENERIFAL
FUlP DIN.' G OF THE ARTS IOUCONCERNl FOR THE
PRESERVATION OF NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND THE NATIONAL ESTATE-,
ISUG-GEST TH7A 1T THRO0U GH AL TH'E SE POLICY INITIATIVES THERE
RUNS A CONSI STEN T THR" AD OF ENL IGHTENMENT, IT IS CERTAINLY
M'Y HOPE THA. T GOV/ ERMMEN-TS OF WVHATEVER POLITICAL COLOUR WILL
BE JUDGED AS. &gt; IUCHL BY TEIlR PO L ICrIES I N THESE AREAS AS BY
THI PCITs 7\ -': IrCE PRACTICAL-A-ND CONIVEflTIONAL-FIEL DS,
IT1 HR HA U C-PAiMN T TH HIGHEST V'ALUES OF
D -RACY AjND CIVIIZATION IS REVEALED, las/ lu hf 
10
THE FUTURE OF YOUR PROFESSION IS FULL OF PROMISE
OF CHANGE AND INNOVATION. MODERN COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY AND
METHODS OF DATA PROCESSING OFFER REMARKABLE OPPORTUNITIES
FOR MORE EFFICIENT LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES,
THERE IS A MUCH GREATER AWARENESS AMONG GOVERNMENTS AND
AMONG THE PUBLIC OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LIBRARY IN
BROADENING OUR KNOWLEDGE, ELEVATING OUR STANDARDS OF TASTE
AND CULTURE AND SAFEGUARDING OUR DEMOCRATIC VALUES, THE
LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA HAS A GREAT ROLE TO PLAY
IN FURTHERING THIS PROCESS, IN IMPROVING THE STATUS OF
YOUR PROFESSION, IN PROMOTING, ESTABLISHING AND IMPROVING
LIBRARY SERVICES IN SHORT, IN FULFILLING THE NOBLE
OBJECTIVES OF YOUR CHARTER. w 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE HON E. G. WHITLAM4, M. P.,
AT THE WOMEN AND HEALTH CONFERENCE,.
BRISBANE, 25 August 1975
one of the regular activities of the United
Nations is to designate a" Ayear to focus attention upon
a particular topic, to create an awareness of a*
particular problem. With this end in view the United
Nations proclaimed 1975 as International Wlomens Year
in order to recognise the important contribution which
women have made to the social, political, economic and
cultural life of their countries and to intensify the
action required to advance the status of women.
For the first time an Australian government
has * committed itself to an extensive program designed
to achieve the aims of the year. Our reasons for so*
doing are two-fold. First, the government recognises
the importance of the United Nations and its activities,'
in the area of human-rights as well as in other areas.
Secondly, the government has shown its awareness of
the problems which face women in our society today and
its commitment to attempting to overcome them.
Within the context of the United Nations
objectives for the year equality, development and
peace Australia has formulated three overall objectives
for our International Women's Year program. The most
important of these objectives is the need to reassess
and change those attitudes towards women which are
harmful and limiting. Together with this, the areas of
discrimination against women in our society must be
identified and a concerted att-empt made to overcome them.
It is also intended that the year be a joyous one emphasising
the creative and positive in women.
It has been of basic concern to us that in " the
course of this year we reach most if not all women in
Australia. There are certain areas which affect, or
potentially affect, every girl and woman in our society,.
whatever her education, her cultural background, her
economic status, her beliefs, her occupation or her way
of life. The health of women is clearly one of the most
impbortant of these areas and the Australian National
Advisory Committee for the year has given it high priority.
Primary emphasis has been-placed on the need to give
women a better understanding of their bodies and of the
many diseases and disorders from which women suffer at one
time or another in their lives. Research in this area
is quite inadequate and until recently no attempt had
been made by governments to provide for these needs. 
-2-
A' great deal more needs to be known about the health
of women, the causes of their health problems, and the
correct treatment for them.
Health conferences are a regular feature of
the Australian scene but this is the first conference in
Australia, and probably in the world, which has dealt
exclusively with women's health.
Health conferences are normally restricted to
professional people and when they do involve " nonprofessiondls"
they are restricted to one particular
aspect of health. This conference is being attendedby
people with widely varying backgrounds who have
themselves decided the program's contents. This is
yet another innovative and most important feature of
the conference. It is obvious from the response to this
conference that many people are concerned about women' s
health needs in our changing society and many women
are themselves becoming increasingly concerned that
these needs be seriously and adequately considered.
There is much to be learnt.
It is appropriate for me to pay tribute to the
Department of Health which in conjunction with the
National Advisory Committee has organized this conference
as its special project for the year. Each government
department and agency was asked to develop a program and
initiate special activities during 1975. The Institute
of Criminology, for example, also in'conjunction with.
the National Advisory Committee has already held two
seminars, one on women as victims of crime, and one on
the participation of women in the criminal justice system..
Further, this conference is the first of three
extremely important conferences each of which is concerned
with issues of fundamental irnoortance to each woman
and man in our society. The next conference, which
begins next week in Canberra, is on Women and Politics.
Its-aim is to create an increasing political awareness
amongst women and to give women the knowledge necessary
for them to bring about the policies, programs and other.
changes which they so justly are demanding and so truly
need. Australia is also to host a United Nations
interregional conference in November on Women, the Media
and the Arts: the Communication ofL Attitudles. This.
conrerence will loo at tne way women are portrayed .1in all..
forms of communication, be it advertising, daily papers,
art, pop songs, Jokes, or literature. We are all well
aware that too often quite unrealistic and even damaging
images of women are communicated to us through these
media and these images in turn reinforce already existing
assemptions which limit and distort the capacities,
potential and life patterns of women and girls.
In the field of women's health the most significant
initiative taken by the g-overnment has been the funding
* of the Leichhardt Women's Community Health Centre. The
aim of this centre is to meet a need expressed by women
for a health service staffed by women and directed solely
towards the special health needs of women. The proposal 
3-
put to the Minister for Health by a group of Sydney women
received immediate attention. It was endorsed by the Hospitals
and Health Services Commission and an initial grant of $ 33,000
to establish the health centre was announced by the Minister.
The centre makes an annual application for funds to continue
and expand its operations. So far it has received a total
of $ 285,735. Since then the government has funded a number of
further such centres under the Community Health Program.
Submissions for women's comtmunity health centres have been
put before the Hospitals and Health Services Commission.
The Commission has supported the establishment of
women's health centres in the belief that such action is not
only necessary in itself but would help to influence the traditi(
health care system to cope more adequately and effectively with
women's health problems. The Australian government is, as far
as I know, the only government in the world that has listened
and responded to such requests from women.
Four centres are fully operational ( Leichhardt,
Liverpool, Melbourne Perth); two centres are part-operational
( Adelaide and Newcastle) and one, the Brisbane Women's
Community Aid Association, has still to find premises.
We are also funding women's refuges and'shelters. The
concept of the refuge has grown out of a response to the
desperate plight of many women. A women's refuge is a place
for a woman, with or without children,. to go when she has nowherE
else; she may be destitute or confused or needing to escape
her existing situation.
On 19 June, the Australian Minister for Health, Dr
Everinghamn, announced a national plan aimed at helping women in
social and domestic crisis situations. Through the Community
Health Program, women's refuges in all states will receive
Australian government funds to pay-for staff, rent, renovation
of premises, equipment, food and other operating costs. Dr
Everingham said 11 organisations would receive a total of
$ 211,885 under the plan.
Refuges have been approved for immediate assistance
in Brisbane, Townsville, Glebe, Marrickville, Liverpool,
Ringwood/ Croydon, Hobart, Launceston, Adelaide and Perth.'
There are now women's refuges in every state and in
the Australian Capital Territory. Perhaps the best known in the
Sydney refuge, Elsie, the first women's refuge to open in
Australia, which has been operating since March 1974.
Many projects relating to the health and welfare of
women have also been funded by the government on the advice
of the National AdvisoryCommittee for International
Women's Year. These have included the production of a
film on cystitis, a conference on Women and Madness. a
counselling service for parents who have feelings of
violence towards their children, a research project on
the difficulties encountered by women who have responsibility
for aged parents or other dependents, a project into the 
-4-
incidence and seriousness of violence to women, the
publication of a booklet giving accurate information on the
availability of and techniques used for legal abortions
and associated contraceptive matters, research on the
particular problems of disabled women and the publication
of research into women medical graduates. We have also
invested in a television series on human reproduction
in the belief that no area of human behaviour is more
private and more sacred whilst at the same time having
ineluctable public consequences. The. insights to be gained
from such a series are not only important globally, a
. necessary precondition to a rational understanding of issues
relating to population and the future development of
societies, but are of deep importance to every individual,
for it is a woman's reproductive capacity which basically
distinguishes her from man. All funding relating to the
health of women, as in all other areas, has been within
the guidelines which I tabled in Parliament in December
last year. It is the government's policy that all persons
should have ready access to family planning advice so
that they may achieve the number and spacing of children
they desire. It is also our policy that women should
have access to all the knowledge required to enable them
to make informed decisions in this area. The broad
objective is improvement of the quality of life for both
parents and children.
The Australian government has taken steps towards
the evolution of a national policy on family planning.
In 1973/ 74 $ 300,000 was expended and in 1974/ 75 well over
million was allocated to this program. We also appointed
a consultant in family planning, Dr Stephania Seidlecky, who
had previously been on the staff of the Leichhardt Women's
Community Health Centre. Dr Seidlecky has already made
many valuable contributions to the family planning program.
There is at present no separate policy on women's
health in Australia. Women's health needs are subsumed
under policies relting to community and mental health,
rural health, aboriginal health, rehabilitation and
hospitals. There is, however, an historical exception,
namely hospitals run by women for women as well as the
more recent evolution of women's health centres and refuges.
It was an understanding of the pressing need for
health services relating directly to the health problems
of women which gave birth in 1899 to the Queen Victoria
Hospital in Melbourne and in 1922 the Rachel Forster
Hospital in Sydney, hospitals staffed by and run for
women. In recent years dissatisfaction with prevalent
attitudes to women's health problems and the paucity of
research into their causes and into their correct treatment
have led to the establishment of womens community health
centres. These centres have invariably been established
by groups of women who, having seen a desperate need
amongst women, be it for health care, shelter or rape crisis
counselling, have voluntarily set about to find a solution.
As well as helping to identify the health needs of 
of women, there is one very important question which this
conference should discuss. This is whether or not
women's health needs should be integrated -throughout the
various components of the health service system, as is
at present proposed, or whether they should be separately
considered, as is, for example, aboriginal health.
The very concept of women's health is a troublesom'e
one. it brings to mind those problems or illnesses that
are associated with women: reproduction, suburban
neurosis, valium-dependency, psychotic, disorders and so on.
The concept of men's health jars for noL only does it
not evoke any similar associations with men's illnesses,
but it is no more and no less than the concept of health
itself. In this time of change and of questioning it is
more and more frequently poiLnted out that the seemingly
infinite range of women's skills, abilities and interests
are channelled into too few and limiting roles and that
this causes a great deal of human unhappiness, misery and
distress. This is a difficult claim to gauge but some light
can be thrown on it by looking at phenomena such as
successful and attempted suicide, psychiatric conditions
and drug dependencies. Male suicide rates in Australia have remained
remarkably constant since the 1870' s, as did female rates
from 1870 to 1950, but since then the rate amongst. women
has doubled. This increase has produced an overall suicide
rate in Australia that is one of the highest in the world.
This substantial increase in the suicide rate, particularly
* amongst women over the age of 25, is linked with increased
availability of sedative preparations and subsequent
overdose. There has also been a two-or three-fold increase
in attempted suicides, with twice as many women as men
being treated for this.
Further, there is an increasing incidence of
psychiatric illness amongst women, with the two most common
psychiatric diagnoses depressive states and psychiatric.
neuroses being more common in women than men. Depressive
states are most. co-mmon in women in their thirties, and
psychiatric neuroses most co: mmron in women in their f ' ifties.
More significantly they are twice as common in marri-id as
in single women. Almost three timres as many married'as
single women show severe neurotic symptoms, twice as many
married women as married men have felt that a nervous
breakdown was impending, and many mo e women than men
experience psychological anxiety.
over 10% of women in Australia are dependent on
headache or sleeping pills. About 4 million prescriptions
for valium. are made out each year, the majority of these
prescriptions being written out for women. The abuse of
pain killers can be blamed for about 20% of kidney breakdowns
and again more women than men are so affected. 
-6-
These survey results taken together seem to indicate
clearly an increasing distress in Australian women. They
must however be interpreted cautiously for there is another
phenomenon which could well have affected these results.
It is also true in our society that men's lives are
harmed by the limited range of roles and behaviour patterns
which they are allowed. Many of these findings could be
inaccurate because men are less likely than women to admit
to psychological symptoms or to seek help from doctors,
for this could well be seen as weak or' dependent
behaviour and these are the characteristics that our
society allows to women but not to men. Men suffer from
what could well be called the Colonel Glenn syndrome.
It is clear that ours is'a society in which the
quite different expectations about what each sex should
be like and how it should behave or think have become
deeply embodied in its total culture. Anatomy has
become destiny just because anatomical differences at
birth determine which way we are taught to think or behave.
Women are assumed to be naturally emotional, dependent,
easily influenced, cunning s! nsitive, submissive, indecisive
and lacking ambition; men to be naturally logical,
aggressive, independent, objective, direct, decisive,
self confident, and unemotional. These images of women
and men are constantly, daily, reinforced within our
society. Indeed they are constantly and daily reinforced
in medical text books, health professional journals, and
the promotional materials sent by drug companies. It
has been pointed out to me that a recent English study
* of drug advertisements showed basically only two images
of women: the demure in ads for the Pill, and the harrassed
in ads for tranquillisers.
Ads for the Pill showed no women working whether
in the house or in paid employment and little indication
of their social background. Most of the women were
affluent and young ( though not too young), sensible
rather than flighty, demure rather than openly sexual.
In marked contrast the women in the ads for
tranquillisers and anti-depressants are usually older,
with children, more dishevelled and less fashionable than
in those for the Pill and mostly surrounded by piles of
dirty crockery, children, and washing. The message.. in
these ads range from: " lack of space and lack of privacy
spawn unhappy people" ( the suggested solution to this being
to prescribe a tranquilliser to remove the unhappiness)
through to: " the ulcer prone businessman is a cliche of
competitive society. Less recognised as such is the tired
and tearful housewife, resentful of her role, subject
to pressures virtually unknown in former generations"
( the suggested solution being to restore perspective by
tranquillising the disturbed brain chemistry).
Health personnel, like the rest of us, usually
deny that advertisements have any influence on their
behaviour. It may well be true that such advertisements 
do not lead these people to administer or prescribe a
particular product but none of us can fail to be
influenced by the overall message. These advertisements
reveal a consistently limited image of women. Women are
not portrayed as independent individuals, each with a
place of her own in society.
It is clear that there are limits to what governments
alone can achieve in this area. Responsibility for change
lies with all concerned. The basic problem, some of whose
manifestations I have briefly touched upon, resides in
the attitudes which individuals and institutions within our
society have towards women, their health, and their bodies
attitudes which women also have towards themselves and
their bodies. The aim of this conference must be to understand,
challenge and change these attitudes. * To do thissuccessfully
all t--hose concerned in this area must listen
and learn how women perceive the world, must understand what
forces shape their experiences both in their formative and
their more mature years, must question why the fullness
of their experiences is so difficult to accept. Wle must
cease to limit their potential, their potential to develop
into diverse human beings.
Good health care for women and effectLive delivery
of family planning and related services must be based
on adequate and sensitive research into causes and methods
o-f treatment but ultimately it can only come -from a.
correct understanding of how,, women feel about their bodies
and a correct understanding of the lives they live.
It gives me great pleasure then to welcome the
participants to this conference, both Australian and
overseas, and to declare this conference open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
OPENING ADDRESS TO CONFERENCE OF THE CENTRE FOR RESEARCH ON
FEDERAL FINANCIAL RELATIONS, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
27 August 1975
THE NEW FEDERALISM:
A REVIEW OF LABOR'S PROGRAMS AND POLICIES
The title given to this Conference itself illustrates
a basic characteristic of Australian federalism and the
approach which Australians have usually taken towards their
federal system. The general title is: " Making Federalism
Work Towards a More Efficient, Equitable and Responsive
Federal System". We Australians have always tended towards
a pragmatic and practical approach without concerning ourselves
overmuch with deep questionings about the philosophical nature
and purposes of federalism. Significantly this conference
does not ask the question, what is Australian federalism?
It asks, is federalism working, or can it be made to work better?
One might draw a contrast with America. A similar
conference in the United States would, in all probability,
be as concerned with first principles about the nature and
purpose of the American Constitution as about its practical
operation. For a variety of reasons, the Americans have
always tended to be more reverential towards their Constitution
than Australians, though curiously, much more ready to amend it.
whatever one's opinion about the excellence of the
Australian Constitution, one would not, I think, readily
apply to it Gladstone's description of the American Constitution
as " the most majestic single work ever struck off by the
brain of man". However high our regard for our own founding
fathers, it lies this side of idolatry.
The practical and political preoccupations of our
Constitution-makers at the conventions of the 1890' s still
dominate our approach today. We are still preoccupied with
practical and political questions of how to make the Federal
system work. In particular, we have been concerned almost exclusively
with financial relations, as the name of the Australian National
University Centre for Research on Federal Financial Relations
itself bears out. Up to 1972 this question was invariably
referred to as Commonwealth/ State financial relations and usually
meant Commonwealth versus State financial relations. To the
extent that Australian federalism has been limited to the
concept of Commonwealth/ State financial relations the debate has
tended to be cast in terms of confrontation between the States
and Canberra.' This has occurred whatever the Party affiliation
of the State Premiers, whatever the ideological stance of
the Prime Minister of the day a conservative federalist
like Menzies, a conservative centralist like Gorton, or a
reform regionalist like the present incumbent. 
-2-
My first involvement with this Centre when its
establishment was proposed by Mr McMahon in 1972 was to urge
successfully that local government should be included within
its research charter. One hopes that the continuing work of
this Centre and conferences like this may help broaden the
debate and lift it beyond the slogans of centralism versus
States' rights. I believe they are concepts which little
accord with the needs or ideas of the Australian people and are
even less in accord with the reality of what the Australian
Government is trying to achieve.
I accepted the suggestion that the them of my own
address should be: " The new Federalism: A Review of Labor's
Programs and Policies". I thought that appropriate not
least because I used this expression towards a new
federalism in the last major address I made on this general
subject within this University to the Academy of Social Sciencc
at the Australian National University Seminar on Intergovernmenti,
Relations on 8 November 1971. 1 meant then and mean now nothing
especially grandiose about the term. I do not pretend to
have invented a new philosophy of government. My Federalist
Papers, if ever honoured by publication by the A. N. U. are
not intended to be a new testament to replace Hamilton,
Madison and Jay.
I was concerned then as I am now that our institution.,
and administrative system should provide a proper balance
b etween finances and functions, that each of our three levels
of government should be able to carry out the functions which
it is best able to perform. As I said here in November 1971:
" Each of our three levels of government has functions
which it is best able to perform. The key to
effective performance is not domination but
consultation, not centralisation but co-ordination.
An Australian Schools Commission would no more
deprive the States of their schools, nor an
Australian Hospitals Commission deprive the States
of their hospitals, than the present Universities
Commission has deprived them of their universities.
Failing such commissions I see no way of determining
the objective priorities for those Commonwealth
grants without which neither schools nor hospitals
can improve. Again, we will not return power to
the people simply by concentrating assistance on
the existing States. A meaningful devolution of
power will be effected in this country only when
we provide local authorities with the means and
incefttives to associate freely on the basis of
shared urban and regional interests. The new
federalism will rest on a national framework for
the establishment of investment priorities and a
regional framework for participation in all those
decisions which most directly determine the quality
of our lives." ./ 3 
-3-
You will see that that statement addressed itself
to the three criteria implied in the theme of this conference
as the benchmarks by which we may measure how well federalism
is working first more efficient, secondly more equitable
and thirdly more responsive. But there is a question within
the question posed in each case. More efficient, yes but
for what purpose? It is possible to create a system which
may be quite efficient for the administrators but not very
efficient in the delivery of the benefits it is designed to
give. More equitable for whom? It is possible to make
arrangements which are seen as equitable as between the levels
of government concerned in those arrangements but which impose
continuing inequalities as between States and regions.
More responsive to whom? It may be possible to have a
national government which seems to respond readily to demands
and pressures from State Premiers but which is not really
responsive to the needs or wishes of the people.
oversimplified concepts such as centralism or States'
rights, particularly if they are thought of as mutually
hostile, mutually exclusive concepts, would have very little
to do with the promotion of efficiency, equity or responsiveness.
And of course it is a gross oversimplification to depict the
actions of the present Australian Government in centralist
terms. It is a grotesque caricature to depict the program of
the Australian Government in centralist terms.
It is not perhaps sufficiently recognised how much
the program I set out on behalf of the Australian Labor Party
in 1972 was about federalism. Indeed in its totality, in
terms of the initiatives and innovations proposed and the
means by which they were to be implemented, the policy
speech of 1972 could well justify the description of being a
document for a new federalism.
It is true that these programs specified new initiatives
and called for vigorous action by the national Government.
The programs assert the principle that unless the national
Government becomes involved in a major function or costly servicE
that function or service will either not be financed fairly
or not financed adequately or not financed at all. it should
be equally recognised that those national initiatives and
actions required co-operation with the States and the involvement
of the States and local government. Action, reform, involvement
by the national Government are not necessarily centralism.
The program of 1972 was not framed by doctrinaire centralists.
It was not framed as a statement of centralism. Nor, significant
was it interpreted as such when it was presented and argued
not, to the best of my recollection, by those who criticised it,
and certainly not by those who supported it. It was never
depicted in those terms. / 14 
For example, there would be no Australian newspaper
more apt to detect the centralist heresy than the Sydney
Morning Herald. As the thinking behind the Labor Party's
program for national involvement developed and matured, so did
the views of the Sydney Morning Herald. I raised some eyebrows
and some horse laughs when I first urged national assistance
for sewerage works. On 24 October 1969, the eve of that year's
House of Representatives elections, the Sydney Morning Herald
had climaxed its editorial campaign against the A. L. P. with a
crunch line on I quote " Mr Whitlam's dizzy vision of
Canberra deciding the correct line of a sewer in Bankstown."
By 23 January 1970 it was saying surely the Commonwealth
Government will heed the plea of the Premier, Mr Askin for
special assistance on such a basic problem as additional funds
for the Water Board's sewage treatment plans". On 6 August 1970,
it again gave the Water Board's sewerage backlogs as " surely
an unanswerable instance of the need for the Commonwealth to
accept greater responsibility for urban requirements."
On 26 December 1970: " If problems such as pollution are not
to grow much worse, governments, and especially the Commonwealth
Government, must show a deeper appreciation of city needs".
On 7 April 1971: " More than 500,000 homes in the Sydney
metropolitan area are still unsewered. These basic problems
can be overcome only by a reappraisal of priorities at the
Federal level." I've never seen such intelligent, fair-minded,
responsible, judicious editorials in the Sydney Morning Herald
until last week's Budget!
At the heart of the program for national involvement
lay a view about modern, more contemporary, more rational
relations between the three levels of government and more modern,
more contemporary, more rational arrangements for the financing
and discharge of functions which modern communities now require
their elected representatives to fulfil.
Just how much our program was a statement about
tederalism a partnership between the three levels of
government is evident by recalling very briefly its key
proposals. The Schools Commission was designed to examine and
determine the needs of students in government and non-government,
primary, secondary, and technical schools. Quite apart from
the objective of making vastly more money available for education,
w e intended the Commission to -help the States with the greatest
burden upon their Budgets schools.
The Pre-School Commission was designed to enable the
children in the-States to enjoy at least equal opportunities
for pre-school care and education then enjoyed only by children
in Canberra, where the Commonwealth could not escape responsibilit
The abolition of fees at tertiary institutions and the
assumption by the Commonwealth of full responsibility for
financing tertiary education fulfilled an agreement made by all
the Labor leaders, federal and State, in 1967. 
So similarly did our undertaking to make the full range
of Commonwealth assistance available for buildings and
equipment for staff and students at all teacher colleges.
The proposal for a Hospitals Commission meant that the
States would be helped with what was then the heaviest burden
on t1-ir budgets after education.
The program for urban and regional development represente.
an altogether new approach to the idea of national involvement
in the places where most Australians live. It envisaged an
altogether new approach in the relations between the three levels
of government. The specific proposals included the creation
of land commissions, a new Commonwealth/ State housing agreement,
a national sewerage plan and national aid for urban transport.
We proposed to require the Grants Commission to promote equality
between regions as it had formerly promoted equality between
the States. We undertook to accept the offers as they then
were of the New South Wales and Victorian Premiers as they th.
were for the transfer of their State railways systems and to
accept such an offer from any other State.
We undertook to revive the Inter-State Commission to
enable it to achieve the purpose envisaged by the Constitution
of ending the centralism fostered by the State Governments
within their borders through their transport systems. We
undertook co-operation with the States in supporting the
, regional development plans they had already announced. We
undertook assistance to the States and to local commurities for
the preservation of the national estate.
In order to make local government a genuine partner
in the federal system we undertook to make direct representation
of local government a condition of the Australian Government's
participation in the Constitutional Convention pr9posed for 1973.-
Further, we proposed anzamennmntofthe-Financial Agreefl
to give semi-and local government authoriti-. a voice and a
vote at the Loan Council.
It is impossible to say which parts of the program
presented in 1972 were most important in shezr terms of winning
the necessary votes to change the balance of political power.
Certainly, issues like conscription and Vietnam-were charged
with more emotion. But the ongoing issues, the ones that had to
be developed most thoroughly, to be explained most frequently,
to be expatiated upon at greatest length and in greatest detail
were those that come under the three broad headings of education,
health and urban and regional development schools, hospitals,
cities. They might not always have raised the loudest cheers,
but they certainly sustained the longest interest. They may not
have been gut issues, but they were the guts of the program.
And the great relevance of this basic political fact in my
present context is that these programs had to be defined within
a reasoned framework of national-state-local relations, financial,
functional and administrative. 
-6-
They had to be relevant and shown to be relevant to the
systems within which they would update the Australian federal
system. The program for schools, hospitals and cities would
never have made sense had it been conceived just as an exercise
in centralism; it would never have been endorsed if it had
been perceived as such.
It is important to remember that the essence of these
programs is not just increases in government spending. We
sought new techniques, not new taxes. we sought to improve
the machinery by which Australians govern themselves, not
just to outlay more of their money on national programs which
might hold electoral appeal for them.
The program was, particularly in its earliest stages
of implementation, admittedly expensive. It was avowedly
expansive. We sought to do two things. We sought to catch
up a backlog over a whole range of social matters created by
twenty-three years of conservative government and we sought
to make a breakthrough over a whole range of national issues
to make Australian government more efficient, more equitable,
more responsive. We make no apologies for being an activist Government.
But there is nothing necessarily centralist or anti-Federalist
about action by the national government. More action by
Canberra need not be equated with more power for Canberra.
National involvement in the planning and financing is not
incompatible with co-operative planning. Rather it is essential
to successful co-operative planning under the Australian
system. This holds true even in cases where the very greatest
of new outlays have been involved. In what sense can it be
rationally argued that the vastly increased sums made available
to the State Education Departments and the non-government
schools through the Schools Commission is a victory for
centralism? Who could now dismantle the Schools Commission in
the name of State rights? Again in what sense can it be
rationally argued that the redundancy of the private health
bureaucracies through Medibank is a triumph for the central
bureaucracy? But the long rearguard action by four of the StateE
against Medibank was presumably fought on just that ground.
I can best illustrate the approach of the Australian
Government by referring to the actions we took at the three
Premiers' Conferences of 1973, 1974 and 1975.
At the 1973 Premiers' Conference I put the view that in
the fields of welfare housing and tertiary education, Australian
Government spending had grown so much in the 30 years since
the Commonwealth first became involved that the Australian
Government should now accept full financial responsibility
for them. The States accepted the view; the Australian
Government now accepts that responsibility. 
-7-
At the 1974 Premiers' Conference we adopted a new roads
program. I put the view that there was no hope of our having
satisfactory inter-State highways under the existing
arrangements and that acting under Section 51( i) of the
Constitution the Australian Government was prepared to accept
not just 80 per cent of the financial burden, but 100 per cent.
At the 1975 Premiers' Conference I stressed that the
Australian Government was not prepared to carry the States'
deficit where it is growing most rapidly on railways and
hospitals other than on the basis of the agreement which
we had already achieved with South Australia. That is, we
are prepared to acquire the State railways and to share
hospital costs fifty-fifty.
In other words, at these three conferences, we have
shown our readiness to adopt a constructive approach to the
financial problems of the States. It seems to me ludicrous
to suggest that the provision of basic physical services like
inter-State roads and railways should be submerged in debate
over questions of political power or political rights. In
other federal systems such matters are planned on a national
basis. I must emphasise, however, that our approach to the
States' financial problems has by no means been limited to
a willingness to accept responsibility for some of their more
burdensome and costly services. We have not only freed them
of some of their burdens, but have given them the financial
means towards greater freedom in pursuing their own pi: poses.
There has been a very large increase in general purpose funds,
even given the constraints all governments are now under.
The figures are instructive: improved financial
assistance grants to the States, accepted at the June Premiers'
Conference, will provide a total of about $ 3,185 million in
1975/ 76, an increase of $ 811 million or 34.2 per cent over
the grants paid in 1974/ 75. The States are free to determine
how these funds are spent. The increase of 34.2 per cent is
very significantly greater than the increase in total Australian
Government outlays estimated at 22.9 per cent.
There is the additional freedom which Medibank funding
will provide to the States in 1975/ 76 relief of the order
of $ 300 million. The Australian Government has undertaken that
such relief will not be the subject of " offsets" to general
revenue grants. Unconditional funds available to the States
will thus be very significantly increased.
The Budget itself reflects an important change of
emphasis in our future approach. In the first two years of
office we relied heavily on grants under Section 96 of the
Constitution to break through in key areas which had been badly
neglected by our predecessors. Under Section 96 we involved
the national Government directly in new initiatives at the
local level. In the new Budget we have increased emphasis on
untied grants to the States through general revenue assistance
and to local government through the Grants Commission. / 8 
-8-
The June Premiers' Conference was also notable for a
significant-move towards co-operative planning with the
States. Premiers' Conferences themselves are obviously unable
to act effectively to co-ordinate policies and determine
priorities. Before the June Conference Australian Government
officials conferred with State officials on the development
of co-operative planning. Those discussions were taken further
at the Premiers' Conference itself and the Premiers agreed
that the officers should develop more specific proposals and
report back to us.
As I told the Premiers:
" The Australian Government will be seeking in
the longer term a more rational and co-ordinated
system of assessing needs, setting priorities and
allocating resources in the public sector one
based on co-operation between Governments. it
may take years to develop a new approach of the
kind we have in mind, of the kind discussed among
our officials. But we believe a start should be
made now."
We have already taken steps towards co-operative
planning, for example in the fields of transport, health
and urban development.
Transport systems should be planned on an integrated
basis, the right balance needs to be struck between land, sea
and air transport so that the resulting total system satisfies
our nation's needs and priorities.
The Transport Advisory Council has become the major
forum for discussion and consultation on the problems of
public transport services and main railway lines and is now
concerned also with road matters. Moreover, the Australian
Government has recently taken the initiative in bringing
aviation matters before the Council.
In the health field, two major new programs have been
developed by the Hospitals and Health Services Commission in
close co-operation with the States the Community Health
Program and the Hospitals Development Program.
In the latter case, formal provision has been made
for co-operative planning the hospitals buildings program
for each State is considered jointly and formally by equal
numbers of Australian and State Government officers who
recommend to'their respective Governments the total program
of hospital development within the particular State.
In the case of the community health program, there is
a process of consultation, somewhat short of co-operative
planning, which recognises that individual health services
must be seen as part of an integrated and co-ordinated system. 
There is growing support for the development of a
regional approach to the planning of health services. New
South Wales has formally regionalised its health services
planning and administration, and other States are examining
such an approach.
It is hoped that as regional planning and administration
of health services are developed-the Australian and State
Governments will be able to divest themselves of unnecessary
detail and devote their energies to co-operative planning
and evaluation at the broad level, while responding to and
promoting detailed planning and administrative responsibility
at the regional level.
There has been considerable progress recently in the
development of co-operative planning arrangements in the field
of urban development.
Perhaps the most complete example is the arrangements
for Ministerial Councils to oversee the development of each
of the designated growth centres. These Ministerial Councils
require the State and Australian Ministers working jointly to
determine the overall development strategy for each growth
centre-and the forward financial plan associated with that
strategy on a rolling basis five years ahead.
The Australian Government's intentions for co-operative
planning are that it be a process by which national priorities
are identified and harmonised with the priorities of other
levels of governments; by which CO&gt;-ordinated forward planning
i's developed in pursuit of agreed ' priorities and by which functior
and finances of the Australian, State and local gover~ nents
are better balanced.
In February this year I announced the establishment
of a small committee of Ministers to be concerned primarily
with the Australian Government's relations with the States.
The Ministers are the Treasurer, the Minister for Social Security,
the, Minister for Urban and Regional Development, and myself.
This Committee is also undertaking examination of programs of
direct assistance to regions, to local government and to local
communities. This Australian Government has stressed a regional
approach to planning and decision-making.
Agreement has been reached with all States on the
regional borders used for Grants Commission purposes. In most
cases. these boundaries have been defined by the States
themselves. Our purpose in developing a regional policy, in
identifying logical regions and hopefully, contributing to
the growth of a sense of regional identity among Australian
communities, is not to out-flank the States or to replace local
government. But it is a fact that there are a wide range of
community programs and services which are most efficiently and
equitably planned, co-ordinated and delivered at a level
intermediary to those of State and local governments. There are
many examples electricityj reticulation, water and sewerage,
hospitals, libraries, some forms of public transport and some
welfare services. 
The Australian Government has been encouraged by
the degree of acceptance of the concept of regionalism by local
government and the widespread recognition that regionalism
is not a threat but rather a stimulus to local government.
For our part, we see regionalism as crucial to our efforts to
make local government a genuine partner in the federal system.
The work of the Grants Commission has been the most important
step to that end that we have so far achieved. Following
the Governments acceptance of the Commission's Second Report
million will be provided without conditions this year
a 42 per cent increase on last year. Despite our efforts
at the 1973 Constitutional Convention and at a special
Premiers' Conference in October 1973 and at the May 1974
referendum, we have not yet been able to fulfil our promise
of 1972 and our hope of 1974 to give local government a voice
and a vote in the Loan Council and reasonable direct access
to the nation's finances.
Central to our concepts of regionalism are devolution
of decision-making and public participation at the regional
and local levels to give the people a say in matters
affecting them directly. The Coombs Royal Commission is
examining the regionalisation of Australian Government
administration with the aim of improving the delivery of
government services to the citizen and of giving the citizen
easier access to the array of services provided by different
levels of government.
At the Constitutional Convention on 3 September 1973
I put it that regionalism was a logical and necessar-extension
of the federal system. I said:
" Why did we create this Federation? The answer
is partly to alleviate inequalities between
regions, between colonies. Why did we accept
the Financial Agreement of 1928? The answer
is to alleviate inequalities between the States.
Why did we establish the Grants Commission? To
reduce even further inequalities between the States.
Much of the object of our history, the thrust of
our traditions, a deep part of the purpose of our
being one nation, is to alleviate inequalities. The
task now is to alleviate inequalities between regions;
our new regions, our new pattern of development know
little of the borders and boundaries established in
Whitehall last century."
It is ironic indeed that some of the Constitution's
clearest intentions and the clearest intentions of the
Constitution-makers in the 1890' s are still so strongly resisteC~
in the 1970' s.
A striking example is the resistance to the reconstitut'
of the Inter-State Commission. Section 101 requires the
appointment of the Commission . The section reads:
" 1101. There shall be an inter-State Commission,
with such powers of adjudication and administration
as the Parliament deems necessary for the execution
and maintenance, within the Commonwealth, of the
provisions of this Constitution relating to trade
and commerce, and of all laws made thereunder." 
-11-
The Joint Committee on Constitutional Review, to
which I was appointed in 1956, unanimously recommended in 1959
the reconstitution of the Commission. It was, as I mentioned
earlier, one of the undertakings I gave in 1972 and repeated
in 1974. I don't recall in all those years any suggestion
that the Commission or the proposal to reconstitute it was in
any way sinister. Yet our intention and more our positive
undertaking to re-establish the Commission has been stalled
in the Senate and you may have noticed some of the denuciations.
For example, the New South Wales Minister for Federal
Affairs, Mr Hewitt was reported on 26 August in Tuesday's
Sydney Morning Herald as saying:
" The bill is more in keeping with the practices
of Nazi Germany than a federal democracy such
as Australia".
The-fact is that the Commission would do the job
intended by the Constitution to help solve the problems,
particularly transport problems, inherent in a federal system,
inherent in the continental nature of Australia herself.
There are the current examples of Bass Strait freight rates,
Victorian transport costs to the Riverina and the cancellation
of shipping services operated by Associated Steamships
from Fremantle to the eastern States. As I wrote on this last
matter to the Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles Court,
on 13 August: " The Australian. Government's intention to
re-establish the Inter-State Commission, which
has been delayed by the Opposition in the
Senate, is designed to examine and seek solutions
to problems of this nature involving competing
modes of transport. In the absence of legislation
re-constituting the Commission, Government
intervention in matters of this kind is beyond
power under the Constitution." m
To sum up the approach of the Australian Labor GovernmE
to the federal system:
the national Government has involved itself
directly in financing and planning of a wide
range of new functions, particularly where
national involvement is crucial to the
achievement of equality of opportunity and
equality of services,
in its relations with the States, the national
Government has accepted or is willing to accept
financial responsibility for services, the
provision of which has hitherto imposed the
heaviest burdens on State budgets. Yet at the
same time we have increased general purpose
grants at a significantly increased level. / 12 
-12-
* We have embarked upon co-operative planning
at both the Ministerial and official level
on a continuing basis in those areas where
national and State responsibilities overlap
or dovetail.
* We have developed a regional policy to provide
community services which cannot be as well
provided by any of the existing levels of
government acting alone.
* Local government is becoming a genuine partner
in the federal system and is securing direct
access to the nation's financial resources.
In contemporary Australia, the questions about
structures, systems and powers the sort of concern expressed
in the old slogans about centralism or States' rights are
more likely to be the preoccupation of politicians, public
officials, the press and, perhaps, academics, rather than
the general public. The people's concern will not be so much
who performs a function, but how well it is performed in
terms of their needs and wishes and hopes.
The program of the Australian Labor Party, as developed
in Opposition, as implemented in Government, has been very
much about an attempt to bring our federal system and our
federal machinery up to date, at least to a degree already
achieved by comparable federal systems, particularly those
of Canada, West Germany and the United States.
For more than a generation, the old approach to the
Australian federal system the buck-passing of responsibility
between governments, the crude confrontation at the annual
charade of the Premiers' Conference exploited the federal
system at the expense of the Australian people. The limitations
of the Constitution were used by all governments of all
parties Federal and State as an alibi. Canberra exploited
the system to justify indifference; the States used it to
justify inertia. I might say in passing, that Liberal
Premiers sometimes think that I am abrasive about their
unwillingness to come to terms with new realities; let me
say at least that I am even sharper with any Labor leader
or State branch who uses the alibi of the federal system to
justify their failure to develop policies either relevant to
that system or particularly relevant to the needs of the people
of their States.
Be that as it may, the fact is that for a generation and
more, other federal systems were attempting to move ahead, to
grapple with the new problems created by the New Society these
highly urban, highly mobile, highly technological civilisations.
We lagged behind.
In very many important respects urban development,
transport, health, welfare, education our program was developed
and designed to match these new realities and to match what was
already being done in modern comparable federal systems. 
-13-
It is interesting some may say ironic that just
when the Australian Government and the Australian system began
to catch up in terms of what had been done abroad in Federal
systems long ago, the results achieved in other systems should
come under a new and searching and critical scrutiny, indeed
a fundamental reappraisal. The new concern is whether the
objectives sought by the range of new federal programs are
actually being met. Are they delivering the goods to the
people they are designed to benefit? Are the expectations raise,-,
by the promise fulfilled in the reality? Have they produced
benefits proportionate to their cost? Have they created
welfare or merely a welfare bureaucracy? These are proper
questions already being asked, particularly in the United
States. We should certainly be asking them here about our
own programs. I should be the last to suggest that--there are
no lessons to be learnt from overseas experience, from the
experience of comparable federal systems, except those that
were to be learnt up to December 1972.
It is further interesting to note that, in the
United States, the new questioning about the efficiency,
equity and responsiveness of federal programs comes especially
from concerned liberals, from Democrats, from the heirs of
the New Deal and the authors of the Great Society.
But this new scrutiny would miss its mark if it mistook
failures in specific methods for failures of ideals and objectives.
It would be a travesty and a tragedy it trie onjectives
of welfare, of equality, of civil liberties, were to
be discredited simply because of flaws in the means by which
governments, here or abroad, were attempting to achieve them.
Knowing how quickly we imitate trends of discussion
in the United States, I think it very likely that it will
become fashionable here quite soon to decry and deride and
strive to discredit the great post-War effort towards
collective and community social welfare and social equality
made in the United States, as well as in Europe, in Britain
and in Australia herself.
From those who seek to enshrine inequality, there is
going to be a great deal of talk about " enforced equality".
Such arguments will miss the point entirely. President Johnson
proclaimed the Great Society. The ends which were sought have
not been achieved. The expectations aroused have not been met.
All sorts of reasons are given and there is truth in them.
But if the vision splendid has dimmed, let us remember that
beyond the actual shortcomings of the programs, in both
conception and execution there was a fundamental contradiction
which lies at the root of the failure of the Great Society.
The contradiction was that even the United States, for all its
unparalleldd wealth and power, could finance both the Great
Society and the war in Indo-China without damage to herself
and all of us. And just as that fallacy is at the root of the
failure of the vision of the Great Society, it is at the root
of half the economic problems we all face today. Let us bear
that in mind, before we pass judgement on the success or failure
of federal government-sponsored welfare programs, either in
the United States or in Australia. / 14 
-14-
Nonetheless, the scrutiny of such programs must be
undertaken are they efficient, are they equitable, are they
really responding to the needs and wishes of the people.
That scrutiny is being undertaken by this Government. The
Budget itself was part of that process as the Treasurer
put it: " A time to pause and take stock, a time to
consolidate".
We want a continuing scrutiny to go on in co-operation with
the other Australian governments at all levels at the
federal, State and local levels, at the political and
administrative levels.
I believe the record of the past two and a half years
justifies the assertion that the Australian Government has
tried to inject a new life into the Australian federal system
and a new meaning into Australian federalism.
It has not been done through any mindless, centralist
doctrine, but by a genuine effort to build more modern,
efficient machinery at all levels of government. It has
been a genuine, creative, constructive, co-operative effort
to make Australian federalism more efficient, more equitable
and, above all, more responsive to the people of Australia
wherever they live. 



2
SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER AT THE OPENING OF
MURWILLUMBAH CIVIC A ND CULTURAL CENTRE, 29 AUGUST, 1975,
1. IT GIVES ME VERY GREAT PLEASURE TO BE WITH YOU
TODAY FOR THE OPENING OF THIS MAGNIFICENT CIVIC AND CULTURAL*
CENTRE FOR MURWILLUMBAH. IT'S MY SECOND VISIT To DOUG'. ANTHONY'S
ELECTORATE IN TWO MONTHS, SO YOU COULD BE FORGIVEN FOR
THINKING THERE'IS A NEW COALITION IN THE OFFING. WE ARE
CERTAINLY UNITED IN OUR CONCERN FOR THE WELFARE AND PROGRESS
OF COUNTRY REGIONS LIKE THIS NORTHERN RIVERS AREA OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
2. WHEN I WAS IN LiSMORE EARLY IN JUNE FOR THE
OPENING OF OZANAM VILLA HOSTEL FOR THE AGED, DOUG ANTHONY
TOLD ME THAT THIS CENTRE IN MURWILLUMBAH WAS CLOSE TO
COMPLETION AND THAT I REALLY SHOULD ACCEPT ANY INVITATION
TO COME AND SEE IT FOR MYSELF. IAM DELIGHTED TO OBSERVE
THAT THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MEMBER FOR RICHMOND DIDN'T
EXAGGERATE ITS VIRTUES. 
0
21
3. MIND YOU1 I HAVE A SNEAKING SUSPICION THAT HE
WANTED ME TO NOTE THE PROGRESS WHICH HAD BEEN MADE AND THE
SPENDID RESULTS ACHIEVED BY THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCIL IN
SUCH A SHORT TIMES BELIEVE THAT THE ARCHITECT WAS APPOINTED
IN' 1973 AND TODAY WE HAVE THIS SUPERB COMPLEX SO ATTUNED
TO THE NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY OF MURWILLUMBAH AND SO
COMPLEMENTARY TO THE TWEED HEADS CIVIC AND CULTURAL CENTRE
OPENED A FEW MONTHS AGO,
4. THE DEBATE -NON-PARTY, OF COURSE -ON A NEW AND
PERMANENT PARLIAMENT HOUSE IN CANBERRA HAS TAKEN MUCH LONGER.
MANY A FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARIAN WOULD HAVE TO SMILE WANLY
ON READING ABOUT THE PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED BY LOCAL COUNCILLORS
BEFORE THIS NEW EDIFICE CAME INTO BEING:
" THE LARGEST SINGLE ENTERPRISE-IN THE SHIRE AND
THE BIGGEST EMPLOYER OF LABOUR, NAMELY THE SHIRE COUNCIL,
HAS CONDUCTED ITS BUSINESS IN A CHAMBER THAT IS NOISY AND
ALMOST DEVOID OF COMFORT FOR THOSE WHO MAKE DECISIONS
INVOLVING MILLIONS OF DOLLARS EVERY YEAR, AND WHICH AFFECT
EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD IN THE DISTRICTS MOREOVER THE
ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF, WHICH HAS INCREASED IN NUMBERS TCf
MEET THE COMPLEXITY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN A DEVELOPMENT
AREA, HAS BEEN WORKING UNDER CONDITIONS WHICH MITIGATED AGAINST
A HIGH STANDARD OF SERVICE," s''/ 3 
I THINK YOU SHOULD PREPARE FOR A LARGE INFLUX FROM
CANBERRA AS NEWS OF THIS CENTRE GETS AROUND,
BUT THE BEAUTY OF THIS CENTRE LIES NOT ONLY IN
THE ELEGANCE OF THE FORMAL MEETING ROOMS AND THE EXCELLENCE
OF THE FACILITIES PROVIDED FOR ELECTED COUNCILLORS AND
COUNCIL OFFICERS IN DEALING WITH THEIR BUSINESS OF SERVING
THE COMMUNITY, BUT ALSO IN THE BREADTH OF CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
ENVISAGED IN THE TOTAL CONCEPT OF THE CENTRE.
LIKE THE IPSWICH CIVIC CENTRE WHICH I HAD THE
PLEASURE OF OPENING LAST MONTH, THIS CENTRE INCORPORATES A
SPENDID AUDITORIUM SUITABLE FOR ALL KINDS OF MUSICAL OR
THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES AND EXHIBITIONS, AND IS ABLE TO
DOUBLE AS A VENUE SUITABLE FOR BALLS, CABARETS, SCHOOL
DANCES AND THE LIKE, IN OTHER WORDS, THE WHOLE COMMUNITY
WILL BE SERVED BY THIS CENTRE, THE LIFE OF THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY, FROM SCHOOL CHILDREN TO ELDERLY CITIZENS, WILL
BE IMPROVED THROUGH ACCESS TO THIS CENTRE.
6. IT SPEAKS VOLUMES FOR THE INITIATIVE OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT BODIES THAT SO MANY OF THEM HAVE SEEN THE NEED
TO CATER FOR CULTURAL PURSUITS WHEN PLANNING NEW CIVIC
BUILDINGS. 
SINCE LOCAL GOVERNMENT IS THE LEVEL OF GOVERNMENT
CLOSEST TO THE PEOPLE, IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT THIS CULTURAL
INITIATIVE SHOULD STEM FROM THIS GRASS ROOTS LEVEL.
I CONGRATULATE PAST AND PRESENT COUNCILLORS AND
THEIR ADVISERS ON THEIR VISION AND PERSISTENCE IN GETTING
THIS PROJECT OFF THE GROUND. GENERATIONS OF MURWILLUMBAH
RESIDENTS, NOT TO MENTION VISITORS, WILL HAVE CAUSE TO BE
GRATEFUL TO YOU FOR GIVING THEM THE OPPORTUNITY OF DEVELOPING
THEIR OWN TALENTS AND TO APPRECIATE THE TALENT OF OTHERS.
7, I FEEL SURE THAT THE AUSTRALIA' COUNCIL, WHICH
ADMINISTERS THE ARTS PROGRAMS OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT,
WILL DO WHAT IT CAN TO HELP DEVELOP STANDARDS AND NURTURE
TALENT IN THIS AREA. ALREADY A SUBSTANTIAL GRANT HAS BEEN
MADE TO THE ART CENTRE IN MURWILLUMBAH FOR DEVELOPING
PROGRAMS INVOLVING BOTH YOUNG PEOPLE AND ADULTS IN THE
ARTS, WITH EMPHASIS ON SMALL GROUP ACTIVITIES IN LITERATURE,
FILM AND DRAMA, AS WELL AS A SMALL ORCHESTRAL ENSEMBLE.
ANOTHER GRANT WILL ENABLE THE CURIOUSLY TITLED YELLOW BRICK
ROADSHOW TO TOUR THE NORTHERN RIVERS AREA, SO YOU CAN SEE
THAT ALL TASTES ARE CATERED FOR. S, 
8, IN THE END, HOWEVER, THE MOST IMPORTANT SINGLE
ELEMENT OF THIS NEW CENTRE MAY PROVE TO BE THE NEW
REGIONAL LIBRARY, WHOSE ESTABLISHMENT WILL FILL AN
IMMENSE GAP IN THE CULTURAL LIFE OF MURWILLUMBAH FOR
YOUNG AND OLD ALIKE,
IT IS SOBERING TO REALISE THAT BEFORE THIS,
MURWILLUMBAH NEVER HAD THE BENEFIT AND STIMULUS OF A
FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY, DESPITE THE FACT THAT AS SEAT OF
GOVERNMENT FOR THE TWEED SHIRE, IT WAS THE CENTRE OF THE
MOST DENSELY POPULATED RURAL SHIRE IN AUSTRALIA, WHAT A
SAD REFLECTION ON THE INEQUALITIES BETWEEN REGIONS WHICH
THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED TO SEE RECTIFIED,
I AM GLAD TO SAY THAT IN THIS, AS IN SO MANY
OTHER QUALITY OF LIFE AREAS, THERE IS A BELATED RECOGNITION
OF THE INJUSTICE INHERENT IN THOSE PREVIOUSLY ACCEPTED
INEQUALITIES, ONLY LAST WEEKEND I OPENED THE BIENNIAL
CONFERENCE OF THE LIBRARY ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA, WHICH
WAS BEING HELD IN MELBOURNE, AND THERE WAS A GREAT DEAL
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT HOW LIBRARY SERVICES COULD BE BEST
UTILISED IN RURAL AREAS IN ORDER TO REDRESS THIS OBVIOU.' J
INJUSTICE, / 6
L 
-6-
As I SAID IN MY SPEECH TO THAT CONFERENCE,
" CERTAINLY THE TASK OF PROVIDING EFFICIENT PUBLIC LIBRARY
SERVICES IS MUCH MORE DIFFICULT IN THINLY POPULATED
RURAL AREAS THAN IT IS IN COMPACT CENTRES OF POPULATION
IN CITIES AND TOWNS, BUT THERE IS NO REASON WHY THE
CITIZENS OF MELBOURNE SHOULD HAVE ACCESS TO BETTER
LIBRARY SERVICES GREATER FREEDOM OF INFORMATION THAN
THE CITIZENS OF ECHUCA OR GEELONG." I COULD AS EASILY
HAVE SAID SYDNEY AND ORANGE OR MURWILLUMBAHI
1 WENT ON TO SAY THAT THERE IS A LONG TERM NEED
TO CO-ORDINATE AND RATIONALISE ALL LIBRARY SERVICES: AND
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT IS HAPPENING HERE. THE RICHMOND TWEED
REGIONAL LIBRARY WAS FORMED IN 197' 4 BY THE TWEED SHIRE
COMBINING WITH LISMORE CITY AND BALLINA MUNICIPAL COUNCILS,
THUS ENSURING THE CIRCULATION OF BOOKS BETWEEN LIBRARIES
AT LiSMORE, BALLINA, TWEED HEADS, AND NOW MURWILLUMBAH.
AND THAT HAS THE EFFECT OF VASTLY INCREASING YOUR INITIAL
BOOK STOCK OF 8,000 VOLUMES TO BETTER SERVE ALL YOUR
BORROWERS. IMPROVED SCHOOL LIBRARY SERVICES IN THE SHIRE
WILL BE A FURTHER ADJUNCT TO THIS EXCITING DEVELOPMENT.,
11. FINALLY I PAY TRIBUTE TO EVERYONE ASSOCIATED
WITH THIS PROJECT, FROM THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCILLORS AND
EMPLOYEES THROUGH TO THE ARCHITECT AND BUILDERS AND SUPPLIERS
AND EVERYONE WHO HAS HAD A HAND IN THE PREPARATIONS FOR
TODAY'IS OFFICIAL OPENING. IPAY PARTICULAR TRIBUTE TO THE
CRAFTSMEN RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EXQUISITE TIMBER PANELLING
AND COPPER INLAYS THAT ARE SUCH AN ATTRACTIVE FEATURE OF THE
COUNCIL CHAMBER ITSELF. at17 
-7-
IMUST SAY THAT WHEN JOHN GORTON ONCE ACCUSED
ME OF SOUNDING LIKE A SHIRE PRESIDENT, THERE WERE THOSE WHO
CHOSE TO CONSIDER IT AN INSULT. I CONSIDE-RED IT A
COMPLIMENT AT THE TIME. AND I WOULD FIND IT A PRIVILEGE
INDEED TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE TWEED SHIRE COUNCIL ON A
DAY LIKE TODAY WITH THIS MAGNIFICENT PROJECT A REALI. TY.
I HAVE VERY MUCH PLEASURE IN DECLARING OPEN
THE MURWILLUMBAH CIVIC AND CULTURAL CENTRE. TO BORROW
YOUR OWN WORDS " MAY IT SERVE THE CITIZENS OF THE TWEED
SHIRE UNTIL WELL INTO THE 21ST CENTURY. MAY IT ENCOURAGE
THEIR INVOLVEMENT IN CULTURAL PURSUITS AND ADD TO THEIR
ENJOYMENT OF LIFE. cI I'
CIL, I
A l Q
4 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER Emag8.0pm C
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.,
AT THE OPENING OF THE
WOMEN AND POLITICS CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, 31 AUGUST 1975
For most of this country's history women have
lived without visible political power; they have been excluded
from almost all levels of government in our society. The
momentous decisions of war and peace, of finance and technology,
as well as the everyday decisions which affect how all people live,
have been made by a minority of individuals who happen to be
born white and male. Women whether they be conservative, liberal
or radical should be fully represented in the political power
structure simply as a matter of right: not just because they are
women, but because they are capable human beings with skills,
aiities and creativity from whom the world has much to gain.
We all of us live in this man-made, man-defined
and man-controlled world. But if women are to change it they
need to understand the complex processes of this world. They
need to understand how economic, political, educational and
organisational power interacts with and affects their daily lives.
Determination to have a say in matters affecting the lives of
women is not sufficient. Women must learn how to make their words
effective. Women must learn how to bring about those changes they
want, be it in their own lives or in the institutions in our
society that affect them.
It was a genuine determination to bring true
representative government to all levels of government in Australian
society and to allow women full access to all those institutions
whose decisions are of as much concern to them as to men that
prompted the Australian Government to hold this conference. The
aim of the conference is to understand the lessons that the past
can teach us in this area, to bring about a greater awareness of
the political processes and to increase the participation of
women in political activities. It is, in other words, our
intention to bring about, in the course of this conference, a
greater understanding of the means by which women can participate
in the making of political decisions and the difficulties that
will confront them in so doing.
Many of the women who have fought and worked so
hard in the past, in the parliament, in the parties, in the
trade unions and outside in the community are here with us tonight
and during this conference. We have much to learn from them and
are deeply grateful to them for being prepared to share their
wisdom with us. We have also invited women from other countries to
help us in this task that we have set ourselves. I take this
opportunity to welcome these distinguished and outstanding guests
both to this conference and to our country. It is a pleasure
and an honour for us that you have accepted our invitation to
attend. The claim that the rights of men and the rights of
women are one and the same, particularly in the political arena,
is a time-honoured one though, sadly, too often either disputed
or dismissed. 
one of its outstanding defenders was Mary
Wolistonecraft who in 1792, 3 years after the outbreak of the
French Revolution and 4 years after the establishment of the
British colony in Australia, published her Vindication of the
Rights of Women. Her theme is that women are first and foremost
human beings, that the mind has no sex, and that society is
wasting its assets if it retains women in the role of convenient
domestic slaves and alluring mistresses, denies them economic
independence and encourages them to be docile and attentive to
their looks to the exclusion of all else.
She claims that the full achievement of social
equality will not come about until women begin to take an interest
in politics and in particular in parliamentary representation.
The Sydney suburb of Wollstonecraft is named after
her nephew, Edward, who fled to Australia from the notoriety of
his aunt, an unrepentant and outspoken unmarried mother.
The fight for the right to vote and the right to
sit in parliament left Australian women relatively untouched
and unaware. In England the King and the Prime Minister could
not even go to the races without facing a demonstration by
suffragettes. In 1908 in Hyde Park, London, women gathered from
all over the United Kingdom to listen to the preachers of the
cause. the Times next day estimated that there were half a
million people there. ( For comparison, even the great civil rights
demonstration in Washington in the summer of 1963 at which Martin
Luther King made his " I have a dream speech attracted fewer
peo~ ple than this.) There was nothing like this in Australia although
in Victoria a suffrage petition one mile long was collected by the
women and refused lodgement by the parliament.
The issue in Australia which in fact brought women
into the political and social arena and forced them to become
politically active was the anti-conscription campaign during the
First World War. Adela Pankhurst, who had migrated to Australia
some years earlier, fought, marched, and was imprisoned along
with our own women over this issue. For the first time women
were seen by governments, political parties, and trade unions,
as a force to be contended with rather than mere political domestics:
brewers of tea, bakers of cakes and very efficient raisF-rs of money.
The dilemma is that women have actively sought
election to our parliaments and have actively fought to have
women's issues seriously discussed within them. Yet over the
decades success at either of these endeavours has been at best
only sporadic. The political activity of women began first with the
establishment of women's unions in the 1880' s and 1890' s, in
Victoria in the clothing trades, in Queensland amongst the women
shearers and in South Australia as a direct protest against the
sweatshop working conditions-of the majority of women workers.
The first woman trade union organiser, Emma Miller, was appointed
in Queensland in the 1890' s. Women's unions were seen as a
necessary step in the fight to win economic equality and 
3.
subsequently political equality.
Women were on the whole agreed, as Vida Goldstein
herself said, that through not having women in parliament the
energy and valuable time of individual women and women's organisation
had to be spent on the often herculean task of educating members
up to a point of seeing the injustices affecting women.
Groups formed with the aim of increasing the
poli , tical representation of women. At times these were affiliated
to a political party as, for example, were the Women's Central
Organisat * ing Committees of the A. L. P. and the Australian Women's
National League, but time and time again women's groups such as
the Australian Women's Party, the Women for Canberra Movement, the
Women's non-Party League, the Women's Political Association and
the Women's Electoral League prided themselves on their
independence from the existing political parties.
These groups supported women candidates in spite
of the overwhelming historical evidence that few independents
are ever elected to parliament and despite the knowledge that in
the practical conduct of political life there is on the whole
a limit to what an indpeendent parliamentarian can achieve. Doris
Blackburn, the second woman to be elected to the House of
Representatives, was one of the few independents to have ever
sat in it. This is not to say that women have not stood for
the Federal and State Parliaments. Indeed up until 1943 when
the first women were elected to the Federal Parliament Dame Enid
Lyons to the House of Representatives and Senator Dorothy Tangney to
the! Senate at least 53 women had stood for the Federal Parliament.
Of these, 33 stood as independents and 2 were sponsored by the
Australian Women's Party. But during these 42 years only 7 women
were pre-selected by a major party. The story was much the same
or worse in the state parliaments. The first woman to be elected
to any parliament in Australia was the Honourable Edith Cowan,
who was elected to the Western Australian Legislative Assembly in
1921, the year after women were first given this right in Western
Australia. She, along with Catherine Spence, who was one of
Australia's greatest champions of the cause of proportional
representation, has been honoured in our recently released set
of stamps of famous women.
Within the ranks of those women who havEi worked
throughout the decades to bring about the, changes needed by
women there was a similar division between those women who felt
that women's issues were best served by remaining outside of party
politics and those who insisted on the necessity of working from
within the political parties. The first stance has been best articulated,
perhaps, by Rose Scott, whose retirement message was: " Have
friends in all parties, that is the only way to win anything..
Once women go into party politics they become the catspaws of men.
The women's and children's cause should stand alone until absolute
equality is obtained." 
As, however~ the women around Rose Scott increasingly
involved themselves in issues relating to women and children they
became more and more caught up in party politics. The Women's
Labour Leagues and the Women's Liberal Leagues were formed. The
same thing happened to Vida Goldstein in Victoria when, in 1903,
Lilian Locke and many other women withdrew from-the Women's
Political Association to organise the women's vote for the Labour
Party. Once pre-selected or elected there still remains
a host of problems which women face and which they no doubt will
continue to face until a woman politician is as everyday a
phenomenon as a man politician.
Women campaigning for election in Australia have
often found their male opponents only too willing to use slogans
such as, " Do we have to suffer another term of ineffectual prattle,
or do you want a strong man in Parliament?", or " I am just your
man, and will answer you man to man." These examples are not drawn
from the 1900' s but from the 1960' s.
In 1959 when the first women were nominated for the
South Australian Legislative Council, a writ was taken out to
restrain the returning officer from accepting their nominations
on the ground that the South Australian Constitution Act used male
pronouns. Of course, it's only in 1975 that that particular legislative
body has accepted " one man, one vote".
Another insight can be gained from Dame Enid Lyons'
autobiography: " Two months before the new baby was born I was
asked to speak at the opening of the Federal election
campaign. At five o'clock on the day of the meeting
I was totally unprepared. I had had a particularly trying
day, with no time to make a note or even to collect my
thoughts. " And now, it was nearly the children's bedtime.
I felt desperate. With the bath water running and the
milk for the children's tea heating on the stove I
sat down at the dining table with pencil and paper.
" I was tired to death. The baby on my knee was
crying with fatigue, the other children were quarrelling
noisily. Suddenly I burst into tears. This was hot
fair. No man was expected to endure such things. When
Joe prepared a speech I silenced the whole house so that
he could concentrate on his * task."
It cannot be said, however, that women in politics
have no sense of humour. In 1943 Mrs Jessie Street stood for
the Labor Party against Mr Eric Harrison and Mr William Charles
Wentworth IV. She deciddd to take advantage of her name: strips
of paper were printed and pasted on the walls, coping stones and
street signs throughout the electorate. Soon the most prestigious
roads, avenues, lanes and cul-de-sacs in Australia all bore the
name Jessie Street. But from the lessons and the fascination of the past
we must turn to the present. 
My government has long recognised that discrimination
against women is incompatible with human dignity and the wellbeing
of society. our policies and programs in this area have, to date,
been based on two basic principles: justice and humaneness.
The aim of these policies and programs has been to give women the
pre-conditions necessary for them to be able freely to choose the
lives they want to lead. To do this women must have the possibility
of a-little peace of mind as well as the possibility of financial
and emotional independence. It is only just and fair that women enjoy equal
pay for work of equal value, access to training and retraining
schemes, equal opportunities in recruitment and promotion and decent
working places. It is also only just that women should not be
expected to bear full responsibility for the rearing and care of
our future generations. Many women will, of course, choose to
accept the-brunt of this responsibility but for these women, as
well as for those women who cannot or who are contributing to our
society in other ways, there still remains the need for access
to a wide range of services for their children.
in order to correct these past injustices, to
respond to the demand for equality, the government's actions
have included the establishment of anti-discrimination committees
in each State as well as at the national level, ratification of
the 1953 United Nations Convention on the Political Rights of
Women and the I. L. O. Equal Remune-ration Convention, 1951, and
Discrimination ( Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958,
submissions to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for
equal pay for work of equal value and an adult minimum wage and
the establishment of a sub-committee of the Schools Commission to
investigate and make recommendations on the education of girls
and women. We have introduced a program of childhood services
designed to respond to the needs of young children and their parents
whether these needs are for occasional care, regular care,
education, counselling, creative development, emergency care,
before or after school care: or holiday care. For this financial
year $ 74 million has been allocated to this program.
In Australia more than in most countries decisions
and advice on political matters have been made and given by statutory
bodies and royal commissions. In 1948 the last Labor government
amended the Broadcasting Act to require that at least one of the
Australian Broadcasting Commissioners shall be a woman. My
government has deliberately sought talented and qualified.
women for appointment to such entities. For the first time, for
example, women have been appointed to the Arbitration Commission,
the Industries Assistance Commission formerly the Tariff Board),
the National Health and Medical Research Council and the Wool
Corporation, and women have been appointed from the outset to the new
education commissions, Hospitals and Health Services commission,
Children's Commission and Australia Council, Justice Elizabeth
Evatt, who has been chairman of the Royal Commission into Human
Relations, was last week appointed Chief Judge of the new
Family Court of Australia. A woman is expected to be appointed as
chairman of the Consumer Protection Authority which is about to be 
-6
established. In the 1940' s the Foreign Minister, Dr Evatt,
ordained that one third of the diplomatic cadets should be
recruited from women but that requirement was revoked by his
successors. My government appointed the first career diplomatist
as an ambassador and has permitted women diplomatists who marry to
pursue their careers These posts are within the-gift of the government.
The government, however, cannot appoint public servants other than
heads of departments. Accordingly, the Royal Commission on
Australian Government Administration, which includes a woman, is
inquiring into the opportunities which must be given to women
in the Public Service. It has also been of deep concern to us that we
lessen the distress and suffering that women face and respond
sensitively to social problems affecting them. We are concerned
about the problems facing all women in Australia, be they young
or old, Aboriginal or newcomers, married or unmarried, English
speaking or non-English speaking.
It is the second principle, that of humaneness,
that has prompted us to fund women's refuges, women's health
centres, rape crisis counselling centres, family planning centres
and multi-purpose centres where the health, welfare, educational,
training, workforce, legal, recreational and child-care needs of women
can be met. We have removed the sales tax from the pill and for
the first time in the history of Australia have recognised that
supporting mothers form one of the largest groups below the
poverty line and introduced a supporting mothers' benefit.
The Royal Commission into Human Relationships has
the task of informing and educating us about the extent and
the effects of these social problems. It is an overwhelming task
for ours is a society which is loath to admit that problems such
as these even exist. Marriages do break up; women do die at the
hands of back-yard abortionists; children are battered; people;
particularly women, do live in extreme poverty; unwanted children
are born; men and women do commit suicide; women are raped;
children are homeless. Before we can act in this area we must
know why all this is so and what can be done to change it.
We have removed many areas of discrimination and
injustice, but we feel very deeply that governments must take
some responsibility in removing the cause of this discrimination,
of these injustices, the Cause lies invariably in the deeply
ingrained cultural assumption that every woman's primary role is
that of daughter, wife, mother, mother-in-law, or grandmother;
nurse, secretary, teacher or shop assistant: the deeply ingrainea
assumption that women are here to serve or assist. The
well-being of men and children within our society must not be
at the expense of the wellbeing of their wives and mothers.
For this is too high a price to pay. 
-7
Women are as diverse, as different from each
other, as are men. We must create a society which acknowledges
this. This is not to say that within that society women may not
freely choose to be wives and mothers and teachers. It is
impossible for us to foresee what such a society would look like.
But it is to say that women must be allowed to develop their
diverse and multi-faceted potential.
International Women's Year has-~ given us an opportunity
to focus on this aspect of our society. It is an opportunity to
make explicit the attitudes which our society has about women,
an opportunity to question and re-think the assumptions, beliefs,
prejudices and opinions about women, their so-called " proper"
roles and their capacities. Each woman and man in our society must
become aware of these attitudes and myths, for it is these that are
the root cause of s-o much of the distress and suffering
experienced by women in our society today. To change these
attitudes, to offer women new possibilities and new life patterns
is our task for International Women's Year and beyond.
To take just one area of concern to this conference there
is a wealth of cliches oft repeated by politicians and researchers
as to why women vote the way they do. Women, they say, are
personality voters, that is they vote for the candidate with the
sexy smile or the fatherly air. Women, they say, vote as their
men tell them. Women, they say, are mindless voters. Women, they
say, do not vote for women. Women, they say, are innately
conservative voters. It is obvious that these " truisms" cannot
all be true, and it may well be that none are. But it certainly
is true that it is time that these assumptions and myths were
questioned. The claim, for example, that women are conservative
voters is often interpreted to mean that they are more likely
than men to be conservative on policy issues. But gallup polls
taken in Australia over the last couple of decades show that
this is not true. Women hold much less conservative views on,
for example, capital punishment or conscription, though they often
hold more conservative views on issues such as legal reform,
prostitution and the permissive society. Hence women's voting
patterns cannot be the result of a general conservatism.
It could rather be seen as a reaction to the sort of
life that women lead, to their day to day experiences. The
permissive society has not benefited women at all. Womien are
all too often exploited in sexual relationships, women all too
often find themselves taking second place to their husband's
mates. If women are conservative voters, this could well be a
response to a society that they do not particularly like and
within which they all too often come of f second best.
Women lack a sense of political efficacy. Playing the
role of voter does not in itself give rise to political awareness.
It hardly suffices to bring'politics to the centre of the voter's
consciousness. More voters-are influenced or changed by personal
discussion than any other means, and women lack such opportunities. ./ 8 
8
It is often said, and truly, that the home limits
women's exposure to political experience and information. But
one of the most enlightening changes that has recently occurred
is that women are insisting more and more that concerns of the
home be the concerns of politics, that the personal be the
political. Child care, family planning, housework and so on
are now becoming issues for the political arena. To this extent
women are in the process of trying to re-define and to re-describe,
the political. I am not here however to lecture women about the
responsibilities of citizenship or the need to join political
movements or to be politically active. Women are in politics.
They know how to organise. They recognise their needs. But
now is the time to define and formulate their demands and to
seek a full share in political power and leadership. It is my
deep belief that what is good for women will in turn be good for
the entire society.
4 



SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE GERMAN-AUSTRIAN
CLUB JAHRESBALL, CABRAMATTA, 6 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. I AM DELIGHTED TO BE WITH YOU HERE TONIGHT WITH
MY WIFE, BACK IN MY OWN ELECTORATE, BACK AT THE GERMAN
AUSTRIAN CLUB FOR THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY YEAR OF YOUR CLUB
BUILDING. I WAS PROUD TO BE INVITED TO LAY THE FOUNDATION
STONE BACK IN 1965, WHEN I WAS THE DEPUTYLEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION AS WELL AS YOUR LOCAL MEMBER. I THOUGHT THEN
THAT YOU SHOWED GREAT FAITH, GREAT POLITICAL ACUMEN,
I. KNEW THAT YOU COULDN'T BE ACCUSED OF PLAYING REALPOLITIK,
BECAUSE A DEPUTY LEADER OF AN OPPOSITION CAN BE AS FAR
AWAY FROM LEADERSHIP AS THE LEADER OF AN OPPOSITION IS
FROM LEADING THE COUNTRY. BUT I LIKE TO THINK THAT SOME
OF YOU BACK IN 1965 BELIEVED THAT IN YEARS TO COME,
GOUGH WHITLAM MIGHT RETURN AS PRIME MINISTER, AND I DID, IN 1972.
2. IT WASN'T SO APPARENT IN MARCH 1965, WHEN I LAID
THE FOUNDATION STONE, THAT 1965 WAS TO BECOME A WATERSHED
IN GERMANY'S MODERN POLITICAL HISTORY. IN SEPTEMBER THAT
YEAR, 1965, JUST TEN YEARS AGO THIS MONTH, A MAN CALLED
WILLI BRANDT WAS ELECTED TO THE BUNDESTAG. BUT ALTHOUGH
HE WAS CHAIRMAN OF THE SOCIAL DEMOCRATS, HE CHOSE NOT TO
TAKE HIS SEAT IMMEDIATELY BECAUSE HE WANTED TO REMAIN AS
GOVERNING BURGERMEISTER OF WEST BERLIN. ER WAR BERLINER,
TO RECALL THAT GREAT PHRASE OF JOHN F. KENNEDY. I HAVE NO
DOUBT THAT YOU ALL KNOW OF MY OWN GREAT ADMIRATION FOR
WILLI BRANDT. I WAS ONCE ASKED TO NOMINATE THE GREAT WORLD
LEADERS AND STATESMEN OF OUR TIME. a/ 2 
-2]
IHAD NO HESITATION IN NOMINATING WILLI BRANDT; I HAVE NO
HESITATION IN NOMINATING WILLI BRANDT. MY INVITATION TO
HIM TO VISIT THIS COUNTRY STANDS, WHATEVER HIS POLITICAL
FORTUNES. AND AS IT HAPPENS HE IS NOW AGAIN CHAIRMAN OF THE
SOCIAL DEMOCRATS, JUST AS HE WAS IN 1965.
3. BUT ANOTHER EVENT OF GREAT GERMAN POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE
WAS TO HAPPEN BY THE END OF 1965, AND I DON'T MEAN THE
OPENING OF YOUR CLUBHOUSE BY THE AUSTRIAN CONSUL GENERAL,
THEN AND NOW PROFESSOR FELSER.
IREFER TO THE RESIGNATION, ON CHRISTMAS DAY 1965,
OF KONRAD ADENDUER AS HEAD OF THE CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATICUNION,
A POSITION HE HAD HELD SINCE 1946. HE WAS TWO WEEKS OFF
BIRTHDAY. CHRISTMAS DAY 1965 MARKED THE END OF AN
ERA IN GERMANY.
4. BUT THE LAST DECADE HAS SEEN UNIMAGINED CHANGES IN THE
WORLD, NOT JUST IN GERMANY. THE POST-WAR LEADERS WERE
ALREADY CHANGING IN 1965; SOME INDEED HAD ALREADY GONE.
HOW MANY OF THE WORLD'S LEADERS AND STATESMEN WHO WERE IN
POWER IN 1965 ARE STILL THERE TODAY? THINK OF CHARLES DE GAULLE*
LYNDON JOHNSON, SUKARNO, Ho CHI MINH.-U THANTo
EVEN OF COURSE SIR ROBERT MENZIES. IT IS SOBERING TO CONTEMPLATE.-
BUT WE CAN ALL TAKE HEART FROM THE FACT THAT THE AGELESS
MARLENE DIETRICH ! S STILL WITH US, AND MOREOVER, WITH US IN
AUSTRALIA, TONIGHT, " FALLING IN LOVE AGAIN" 
-3-
OF COURSE, I HAVEN'T HEARD HER SING ADVANCE AUSTRALIA
FAIR YET, BUT I RECALL BEING QUITE ENCHANTED, MANY YEARS AGO,
ON HEARING THE VIENNA Boys CHOIR SINGING VALZING MATILDA AND
GOD SAVE YOUR GRACIOUS QUEEN$ IN THESE DAYS OF FREQUENT
REFUGEE CRISES IT IS WORTH RECALLING THAT AUSTRALIA BENEFITED
IMMEASURABLY BY TAKING CARE OF AN EARLIER TOURING VIENNA
Boys CHOIR, STRANDED HERE AS A RESULT OF THE WAR.
BUT TO RETURN TO ANTHEMS, I MUST TELL YOU OF THE THRILL MY
WIFE AND IFELT WHEN WE ARRIVED IN KO-LN IN JANUARY THIS
YEAR, TO BE GREETED BY A SUPERBLY STIRRING RENDITION OF
BOTH THE AUSTRALIAN AND GERMAN NATIONAL ANTHEMS.
6. WE HAD ONLY TWO DAYS IN GERMANY DURING OUR EUROPEAN
VISIT, BUT VERY FULL AND PRODUCTIVE DAYS THEY WERE, IN
BONN, K6LN AND HAMBURG. RECALLING THE OUTSTANDING CONTRIBUTION
MADE TO AUSTRALIA'S DEVELOPMENT BY MANY THOUSANDS OF GERMAN
SETTLERS AND THEIR DESCENDANTS, IT IS HARD TO BELIEVE THAT
MY VISIT To GERMANY WAS ONLY THE SECOND BY AN AUSTRALIAN
PRIME MINISTER. THE PREVIOUS VISIT HAD BEEN BY SIR ROBERT
C MENZIES 16 YEARS EARLIER. IBELIEVED IT WAS HIGH TIME TO
RECTIFY THAT STATE OF AFFAIRS. Now, MORE THAN EVER, WE NEED
TO RECOGNISE THE IMPORTANCE, THE VALUE OF OUR LINKS WITH
EUROPE. 7. WHILE'I WAS IN GERMANY;' I NOT ONLY HAD THE PLEASURE OF
MEETING FORMALLY WITH THE CHANCELLOR HELMUT SCHMIDT, AND
WITH THE PRESIDENT, HERR SCHEEL, IN BONN, BUT I ALSO HAD
INFORMAL AND VERY FRUITFUL DI-SCUSSIONS WITH THE PRESIDENT
OF THE FEDERATION OF GERMANY INDUSTRY ( THE [ N K6' LNI
a 14 
-4-
IN EACH CASE I WAS ABLE TO REMIND MY HOSTS OF THE GREAT
CONTRIBUTION MADE By GERMAN'Y MIGRANTS To AUSTRALIA, AND OF
THE FLOURISHING CLUBS YOU HAVE ESTABLISHED TO KEEP ALIVE
CUSTOMS AND TRADITIONS OF WHICH YOU ARE JUSTLY PROUD.
8. IN MAY WE RECEIVED A GERMAN TRADE AND INVESTMENT MISSION
LED By HERR GRUENER, PARLIAMENTARY STATE SECRETARY, AND
INCLUDING SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICERS AND REPRESENTATIVES
OF PRIVATE INDUSTRY. THIS VISIT AROSE DIRECTLY FROM THE
SUGGESTION MADE BY THE GERMAN FOREIGN MINISTER, HERR GENSCHER
DURING MY VISIT, THAT SUCH A VISIT WOULD BE ESPECIALLY
VALUABLE IN PROVIDING A COMPREHENSIVE UNDERSTANDING OF)
AUSTRALIA'S FOREIGN INVESTMENT POLICY. I READILY AGREED.
IN NOVEMBER WE WILL HAVE THE PLEASURE OF THE COMPANY OF
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE, HERR MOERSCH WHO
WILL BE VISITING AUSTRALIA AS PART OF A TOUR OF SOUTH EAST
ASIA DESIGNED TO PUT HIM IN TOUCH WITH THE LATEST POST
VIETNAM DEVELOPMENTS IN OUR REGION, ONE THING WHICH WILL
BE OF OBVIOUS INTEREST IS THE PROGRESS MADE BY PAPUA NEW
GUINEA, WHICH BECOMES INDEPENDENT ON 16 SEPTEMBER. SINCE
NEW GUINEA WAS ONCE A GERMAN MANDATED TERRITORY, AND SINCE
AUSTRALIA HAS HAD THE MOST RECENT TRUSTEEESHIP TASK, OUR
INTEREST IS MUTUAL,
ANOTHER VERY IMPORTANT VISITOR SCHEDULED TO COME TO
AUSTRALIA IN FEBRUARY OR MARCH NEXT YEAR IS THE MAYOR OF
WEST BERLIN, HERR KLAUS SCH'UTZ... As I MENTIONED BEFORE THERE
IS A STANDING INVITATION TO -ONE OF HIS PREDECESSORS, WILLI
BRANDT, JUST AS THERE IS FOR CHANCELLOR SCHMIDT AND
FOREIGN MINISTER GENSCHER. s v 
9, FIND IT GRATIFYING THAT TOP LEVEL VISITS OF THIS
NATURE BETWEEN OUR COUNTRIES ARE BECOMING THE RULE RATHER
. THAN THE EXCEPTION, IT IS ONLY PROPER THAT THERE SHOULD BE
MORE REGULAR CONTACT BETWEEN THE LEADERS AND THE PEOPLE OF
GERMANY AND AUSTRIA AND AUSTRALIA. CERTAINLY MANY MORE
AUSTRALIANS ARE TRAVELLING To GERMANY AND AUSTRIA THAN WAS
THE CASE TEN YEARS AGO, NOT LEAST BECAUSE INCREASING NUMBERS
OF AUSTRALIANS ARE WANTING TO SEEK THE SNOW RATHER THAN THE
SUNSHINE DURING THE AUSTRALIAN SUMMER MONTHS.
AND TOURISTS COMING TO AND TRAVELLING ROUND AUSTRALIA
CAN BE IN NO DOUBT AS TO THE CULTURAL CONTRIBUTION MADE BY
AUSTRIAN AND GERMAN SETTLERS IN AUSTRALIA, THE
AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION PRODUCES A
PUBLICATION, N~ OW IN ITS SECOND EDITION, CALLED " AUSTRALIAA
LAND OF THINGS To THIS DEALS WITH THE ATTRACTIONS,
SCENIC, CULTURAL, CULINARY, SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL OF
EACH STATE IN TURN. IT ALSO LISTS THE FESTIVALS WHICH TAKE
PLACE IN OUR MAIN CITIES. THERE AREN'T THAT MANY, AS IT
HAPPENS, BUT THERE IS ALWAYS EITHER AN OKTOBERFEST OR A
SCHUTZENFEST, FROM DARWIN TO SYDNEY. FROM HAHNDORF TO HOBART.
AND WHENEVER I POSSIBLY CAN, I MAKE IT MY BUSINESS TO PROCURE
AN INVITATION WHICH IS VERY EASY -AND TO ATTEND -WHICH
IS OFTEN QUITE HARD.
NOW THIS YEAR I HAVE BEEN INVITED TO BOTH BRISBANE'S
OKTOBERFEST, AND TO YOUR OKTOBERFEST. AND SINCE THIS YEAR
YOUR OKTOBERFEST, OUR OKTOBEFkFEST, IS COMING-HOME To FAIRFIELDAFTER
BEING HELD IN ANOTHER PLACE YOU WILL KNOW WHICH
OKTOBERFEST I WILL ATTEND. I'LL TRY TO GET To BRISBANE AS
WELL, BUT I HAVE A FIRM ENGAGEMENT TO Al [ END OUR OKTOBERFEST 
-6-
ON 4j OCTOBER, AND I LOOK FORWARD VERY MUCH TO SEEING YOU
ALL AGAIN FOR THAT ANNUAL FESTIVAL, HAVE THE FONDEST
MEMORIES OF THE MANY O. KTOBERFESTS I HAVE ATTENDED OVER
THE YEARS., AM SURE THIS WILL BE NO EXCEPTION,
11 IPAY TRIBUTE TO EVERYONE CONNECTED WITH THIS EVENING'S
JAHRESBALL, AS WELL AS THE OKTOBERFEST, AND TO ALL THOSE OF
GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN DESCENT WHO HAVE DONE SO MUCH TO MAKE
AUSTRALIA A MORE DIVERSE, A MORE STIMULATING, A MORE ENJOYABLE
PLACE TO LIVE. AT THE LAST CENSUS IN 1971, THERE WERE 23,941
PEOPLE IN' AUSTRALIA WHO WERE BORN IN AUSTRIA AND 110,811
WHO WERE BORN IN GERMANY. THIS COMPARES WITH 1902 FROM
AUSTRIA AND 38,352 FROM GERMANY WHO WERE HERE IN 1901, THE
YEAR OF FEDERATION.
' THEY AND THEIR DESCENDANTS HAVE GIVEN SO MUCH OF
THEMSELVES AND OF THEIR HERITAGE TO EACH OF THE AUSTRALIAN
STATES AND TERRITORIES IN THE YEARS SINCE FEDERATION,
THAT AUSTRALIA SHOULD BE, AND IS GRATEFUL TO THEM. YOU CAN
BE SURE THAT I STRESSED THIS ON MY VISIT To GERMANY EARLIER
THIS YEAR. THANK YOU FOR WHAT YOU HAVE ALL DONE FOR MY
HEIMATLAND, AND THANK YOU FOR MAKING ME SO WELCOME HERE AND
IN GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN COMMUNITIES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA. 
CURRENT PENSION/ BENEFITS
PAID TO PEOPLE RESIDING IN
AUSTRIA AND GERLMANY
Social Welfare Branch
3 September 1975
Pension/ Benefit N. S. W. Total Australian Total
Austria W. Germanv Austria W. Germany
Age 13 23 33 105
Invalid 6 5 14 16
Wives 2 1 4 8
Widows 0 4 3 22
Supporting Mothers 0 1 1 2
Total 21 34 55 153 



NOTES FOR THE PRIME MINISTER
FOR THE OPENING OF EBER BUNKER'S HOUSE, COLLINGWOOD,
LIVERPOOL, 6 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. I IMAGINE IN MELBOURNE TODAY THERE WOULD BE
A MUCH BIGGER CROWD TO SEE COLLINGWOOD THAN
THERE IS HERE IN LIVERPOOL. IN MELBOURNE
THEY HAVE A MUCH GREATER SENSE OF HISTORY.
COLLINGWOOD FANS ARE NUMBERED IN THEIR
THOUSANDS-ESPECIALLY ON SATURDAY AFTERNOONS,
2. COLLINGWOOD WAS THE HOME OF CAPTAIN EBER BUNKER,
THE FOUNDER OF THE AUSTRALIAN WHALING INDUSTRY.
I HOPE NO ONE WILL CONFUSE EBER BUNKER
WITH CLEAVER BUNTON. ONE LIVED IN A HOUSE IN
LIVERPOOL AND THE OTHER SITS IN A HOUSE IN
CANBERRA. BOTH HOUSES HAVE 19TH CENTURY
ASSOCIATIONS AND ARE BADLY IN NEED OF REPAIR.
3. LOOKING BACK THROUGH THE LIST OF FORMER OWNERS
OF COLLINGWOOD, AFTER EBER BUNKER, I FIND THERE
WERE INDUSTRIALISTS, PASTORALISTS, MEAT TYCOONS,
LANDOWNERS AND DEVELOPERS, A FORMER TREASURER
OF SIR SAUL SAMUEL, AND A SECRETARY OF
THE AUSTRALIAN JOCKEY CLUB, GEORGE ROWE. THEY
WERE ALL ADMIRABLE CITIZENS BUT NOT THE SORT OF
PEOPLE WHO NORMALLY SUPPORT MY GOVERNMENT.
WERRIWA WASN'T SUCH A SAFE LABOR SEAT IN THE OLD
DAYS. SO IT'S AN UNEXPECTED HONOUR TO BE ASKED
TO PERFORM THIS OPENING. ,/ 2 
14. WHENEVER I AM GIVEN THE KEYS TO A HOUSE, THE
P-RESS AND THE OPPOSITION ACCUSE ME OF ACQUIRING
ANOTHER OFFICIAL RESIDENCE. THE LODGE,
KIRRIBILLI, AND NOW COLLINGWOOD, I WANT IT TO
BE CLEARLY UNDERSTOOD THAT WHILE COLLINGWOOD
IS IN MY ELECTORATE, IT IS NOT FOR MY PERSONAL
USE. IHAVE TO MAKE THAT CLEAR BECAUSE WE
ARE SPENDING A LOT OF PUBLIC MONEY ON THE
RESTORATION. MANY PEOPLE AND ORGANISATIONS HAVE BEEN0
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS SPLENDID PROJECT. THE
FIRM OF STOCKS AND HOLDINGS HAVE COLLABORATED
WITH LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL IN THE
RESTORATION. STOCKS AND HOLDINGS HAVE GIVEN
$ 10,000 AND CARRIED OUT RESTORATION WORK TO
THE VALUE OF $ 3,000. My GOVERNMENT HAS MADE
GRANTS TOTALLING $ 35,000 THROUGH THE NATIONAL
ESTATE PROGRAM. THE FINAL COST OF THE0
RESTORATION WILL BE ABOUT $ 110,000.
6. WE HAVE BEEN SLOW TO GRASP THE IMPORTANCE OF
OUR HISTORIC HOUSES AND BUILDINGS. ALL TOO FEW
OF THEM HAVE BEEN PRESERVED OR RESTORED,
IAM DELIGHTED THAT ONE OF THE MOST BEAUTIFUL
AND FAMOUS OF OUR OLD BUILDINGS IS BEING
PRESERVED HERE IN LIVERPOOL, A PART OF SYDNEY
WHICH FOR ALL ITS HISTORIC ASSOCIATIONS Is
LACKING IN EXAMPLES OF HISTORIC ARCHITECTURED s / 3 
7,
89 -3-1
IAM HOPEFUL THAT FURTHER FUNDS WILL BE X/' j) Q "
AVAILABLE FROM THE NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAPI.
THE COUNCIL'S REQUEST FOR A FURTHER GRANT
' OF $ 15,000 HAS 8EEN REFERRED TO THE INTERIM
COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL ESTATE, WHO WILL
SHORTLY BE FORMULATING THEIR RECOMMENDATIONS
TO MR UREN ON TH E 1975/ 76 FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE PROGR AM. AN ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE
NEXT NATIONAL ESTATE PROGRAM IS NOT EXPECTED
BEFORE NOVEMBER,. AFTER THE APPROPRIATION
BILLS HAVE BEEN PASSED AND PROGRAMS APPROVED
BY STATE AND AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MINISTERS.
My GOVERNMENT FROM THE BEGINNING HAS GIVEN
STAUNCH SUPPORV-TO THE PRESERVATION OF THE
NATIONAL ESTATE -THE UNIQUE AND BEAUTIFUL
THINGS, THE THINGS WORTH KEEPING IN OUR
COUNTRY IN OUR FIRST FULL FINANCIAL YEAR,
1973-74, NO FEWER THAN 101 NATIONAL ESTATE
PROJECTS WERE APPROVED AT A COST OF $ 2.5 MILLION.
LAST FINANCIAL YEAR WE PROVIDED $ 8 MILLION
FOR NATIONAL ESTATE PROJECTS, ( I17576 ( hAd 3e7 a// a cqe
ILOOK FORWARD TO THE DAY WHEN THE RESTORATION OF
THIS BUILDING IS COMPLETED AND IT CAN BE SEEN
IN ALL ITS FORMER DETAIL AND PAST GLORY. IT
WILL DRAW VISITORS To LIVERPOOL FROM ALL OVER
AUSTRALIA. IT WILL BE A FITTING REMINDER OF
ONE OF OUR GREAT PIONEERS AND THE SUPERB
ARCHITECTURE OF A PAST AGE.-I CONGRATULATE
ALL THOSE WHO HAVE MADE POSSIBLE THIS PROJECT. 



' s I SPEECH NOTES FOR THE PRIMNE MINISTER.
THE HON,. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P.
FOR THE GOULBURN COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
12 SEPTEMBER 1975
1. IT WAS A PLEASURE TO BE INVITED TO ADDRESS THIS
STUDENT BODY AND SEE YOUR NEW COLLEGE. THE COLLEGE WAS
ESTABLISHED IN 1970 AS THE GOULBURN TEACHERS' COLLEGE.
A MONTH AGO ON 8 AUGUST--IT BECAME THE GOULBURN
COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION. IT IS ALREADY PLAYING AN
ACTIVE, LIVELY ROLE IN THE COMMUNITY. IT HAS* ALREADY
MADE ITS MARK AS A VIGOROUS AND EFFICIENT INSTITUTION.
2. NOTHING SO ENRICHES AND INVIGORATES THE
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL LIFE OF A CITY, A TOWN, OR A REGION
AS THE ESTABLISHMENT OF TERTIARY EDUCATION FACILITIES.
N~ E OF THE STRONGEST FORCES FOR DECENTRALISATION, FOR
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, FOR COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT HAS BEEN
THE SPREAD OF COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES TO REGIONAL
CENTRES. THIS IS ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT WHEN YOU LIVE
CLOSE TO A CITY AS LARGE AS CANBERRA. THIS COLLEGE
REINFORCES THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTER AND IDENTITY OF
GOULBURN. 3. THE ARGUMENT iS OFTEN HEARD THAT AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT FUNDING OF TERTIARY EDUCATION OR OUR FUNDING
OF ANYTHING, FOR THAT MATTER MEANS SOME KIND OF CENTRALIST
OR BUREAUCRATIC CONTROL. TH~ ERE COULD BE NO BETTER
REPUTATION OF THIS THEORY THAN THE SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT
OF THIS COLLEGE. 
-2-
I HAVE DRIVEN HERE THIS MORNING FROM CANBERRA IN LESS
THAN AN HOUR. WE ARE GEOGRAPHICALLY CLOSE, BUT NO ONE
SERIOUSLY BELIEVES THAT YOUR PROXIMITY TO CANBERRA, OR
YOUR RELIANCE ON AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT FUNDS, LIMITS YOUR
AUTONOMY OR YOUR POWER TO MAKE LOCAL DECISIONS AT THE
LOCAL LEVEL. YET THE IDEA PERSISTS THAT BECAUSE
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS AND ASSERTS A PROPER
RESPONSIBILITY IN SUCH FIELDS AS EDUCATION, IT IS
. IMPOSING SOME CENTRALIST, BUREAUCRATIC CONTROL.
4, ø L3ET ME DEVELOP THIS POINT FOR A MOMENT. TTHE
BEST RESPONSE TO THIS TALK ABOUT THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE
OF THE CANBERRA CENTRALISTS IS TO LOOK AT THE MAP OF
NEW SOUTH WALES, WE FIND THAT MOST OF THE IMPORTANT
RURAL POPULATION CENTRES, THE BIG COUNTRY TOWNS, ARE
CLOSER TO CANBERRA THAN THEY ARE TO SYDNEY. FOR THE
PEOPLE HERE IN GOULBURN, CANBERRA IS PROBABLY A MORE
NATURAL CAPITALS, A CLOSER AND MORE ACCESSIBLE URBAN
AND ADMINISTRATIVE CENTRE, THAN SYDNEY. APART FROM
WOLLONGONG AND THE NORTHERN CITIES THIS IS TRUE FOR MOST
OF THE POPULATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES. WITHIN 150 MILES OF
CANBERRA WE FIND DOZENS OF CITIES AND TOWNS, LIKE
GOULBURN, CLOSER TO CANBERRA THAN THEY ARE TO SYDNEY. I
LIST THE PRINCIPAL ONES: " COWRA, PARKES, FORBES, WEST WYALONG,
CROOKWELL, YOUNG, GRENFELL, TEMORA, NARRANDERA, JUNEE,
WAGGA, GUNDAGAI, ALBURY, COOMA, QUEANBEYAN, TUMUT, MORUYA,
BEGA. IT IS DIFFICULT TO ARGUE THAT GOULBURN, OR ANY OTHER
PROVINCIAL CENTRE, SHOULD FEEL A CLOSER KINSHIP TO THE
STATE GOVERNMENT THAN IT DOES TO THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. 
-3-
W4HAT WE ARE SEEKING -IN CITIES AND TOWNS LIKE
YOURS -IS NOT . STATE CENTRALISM OR CANBERRA CENTRALISM BUT
TRUE REGIONALISM. THE PROGRAM UNDERTAKEN BY THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS MEANT A GREATER DEGREE OF INVOLVEMENT BY
THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT IN MATTERS LIKE SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS1
WELFARE AND CITIES THAN HAD HITHERTO BEEN ACCEPTED IN
AUSTRALIA. THE UNDERLYING PH) ILOSOPHY IS THIS: IN MODERN
COMMUNITIES, EVEN THE WEALTHIEST FAMILY CANNOT PROVIDE ITS
MEMBERS' WITH THE BEST EDUCATION, WITH THE BEST MEDICAL
TREATM , NT, THE BEST ENVIRONMENT, UNAIDED BY THE COMMUNITY,
INCREASINGLY, THE BASIC SERVI. CES AND OPPORTUNITIES WHICH
DETERMINE THE REAL STANDARD OF LIFE OF A FAMILY OR AN
INDIVIDUAL CAN ONLY BE PROVIDED BY THE COMMUNITY AND ONLY
TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE COMMUNITY IS WILLING TO PROVIDE
THEM. EITHER THE COMMUNITY PROVIDES THEM OR THE Y WILL NOT
BE PROVIDED AT ALL. IN THE AUSTRALIAN CONTEXT, THIS MEANS
THAT-THE COMMUNITY, THROUGH THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT, MUST
FINANCE THEM OR THEY WILL NOT BE FINANCED AT ALL. THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS DETERMINED THAT THESE SERVICES
AND OPPORTUNITIES WILL BE PROVIDED AND THAT THEY WILL
BE FINANCED.
6. OUR NATIONAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMS ARE INTENDED TO
REPLACE THE EXISTING STATE CENTRALISM WITH GENUINE REGIONAL
INVOLVEMENT AND PARTICIPATION. THE PROGRAMS PROVIDE FOR,
OR RATHER, POSITIVELY REQUIRE A LEVEL OF INVOLVEMENT AND
INITIATIVE BY GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS IN THE COMMUNITY.
WE ARE SEEKING THIS PARTICIPATION PARTICULARLY IN THE FIELDS
OF SOCIAL WELFARE, CHILD CARE AND EDUCATION, HEALTH, AND
THE ENHANCEMENT OF THE CITIES AND TOWNS IN WHICH WE LIVE. 
-4-
7, LET ME ILLUSTRATE SOME OF THESE PROGRAMS WITH
PARTICULAR REFERENCE To GOULBURN. THE AUSTRALIAN ASSISTANCE
PLAN IS A PIONEERING EXPERIMENT IN COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT.
ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE IS TO'SEEK OUT AND MEET AREAS OF
SOCIAL NEED HITHERTO EITHER IGNORED OR UN'IDENTIFIED BY
THE EXISTING WELFARE AGENCIES NATIONAL, STATE, LOCAL OR
VOLUNTARY. ITS ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTIC IS THAT ITS WORK
IS BASED ON REGIONS, ON REGIONAL COMMUNITIES AND THAT ITS
WORK AND PLANNING IS TO BE DONE BY GENUINELY INDEPENDENT,
GENUINELY , COMMUNITY BASED GROUPS OF CONCERNED CITIZENS WHOKNOW
THE 3EPCIAL NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY OF WHICH THEY ARE
A PART. REGIONAL COUNCILS HAVE ALREADY BEEN SET UP IN
THIRTY-SIX REGIONS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA, INCLUDING THE
SOUTH EAST REGION OF NEW SOUTH WALES. THE COUNCILS
ACT AS A COMMUNITY FORUM FOR DISCUSSION AND A COMMUNITY
INSTRUMENT FOR ACTION IN IMPROVING EXISTING WELFARE SERVICES
AND PERHAPS MORE. IMPORTANT IN THE LONG RUN, EXPERIMENTING
IN NEW FORMS OF WELFARE.
8. THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT HAS DECIDED TO ESTABLISH
A CHILDREN'S COMMISSION. AGAIN, WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE
PRINCIPLE OF INVOLVING THE COMMUNITY IN THE PLANNING AND
MANAGEMENT OF PROGRAMS SPONSORED BY THE COMMISSION. THE
CHILDREN'S COMMISSION WILL PROVIDE HELP FOR A WIDE RANGE
OF IMAGINATIVE AND FLEXIBLE PROGRAMS DEVOTED TO LOOKING
AFTER CHILDREN BEFORE THEY REACH SCHOOL AND CARING FOR
OLDER CHILDREN OUTSIDE SCHOOL HOURS. A NUMBER OF PILOT'
PROGRAMS ARE ALREADY BEING SET UP AND WILL BE FUNDED BY
THE COMMISSION. AMONG THEM IS A COMMUNITY CARE PROJECT
SPONSORED BY THE CHURCHES IN GOULBURNI as a 
THE IDEA IS TO MAINTAIN FAMILY GROUPS IN THEIR OWN HOMES
WITH DAY CARE, CRISIS AND EMERGENCY SERVICES. THE PROGRAM
WILL COST AN ESTIMATED $ 60,000 A YEAR AND WILL-COMMENCE
NEXT FEBRUARY WITH A THREE-YEAR FUNDING PROGRAM. THROUGH
THE CHILDREN'S COMMISSION THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT IS
PROVIDING RECURRENT ASSISTANCE TO THE LADY MCKELL CHILD CARE
CENTRE AT GOULBURN. THE CENTRE HAS RECEIVED OVER $ 27,000
TO DATE. ', THE AREA IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM IS INTENDED TO
IMPROVE THlE QUALITY OF LIFE IN NOMINATED REGIONS THROUGH
PROJECTS DETERMINED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE REGION. A
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPT IS THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY
!' PARTICIPATION IN MAKING DECISIONS THAT AFFECT THEIR REGION
AND THEIR WAY OF LIFE.
THE AIP HAS BEEN OR EXERCISE IN CO-OPERATIVE
FEDERALISM WITH STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BEING INVOLVED
CLOSELY IN ALL ASPECTS OF THE PROGRAM. THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT IS PROVIDING $ 14.1 MILLION IN 1974-75 FOR AREA
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS. THE SOUTH EAST REGIONAL OF NEW SOUTH
WALES RECEIVED GRANTS TOTALLING $ 750,000 IN 1974--75 AND
WILL RECEIVE A SIMILAR AMOUNT IN 1975-76. THE GOULBURN
CITY COUNCIL RECEIVED $ 8,000 IN 1974-75.
THROUGH THE GRANTS COMMISSION, THE GOULBURN CITY
COUNCIL RECEIVED $ 150,000 LAST FINANCIAL YEAR AND WILL
RECEIVED $ 200,000 THIS FINANCIAL YEAR AN INCREASE OF
33 PER CENT. THESE GRANTS COME WITHOUT STRINGS. THE COUNCIL
IS FREE TO SPEND THEM AS IT WISHES. THEY DO NOT REDUCE
ANY NORMAL INCOME THE COUNCIL MAY RECEIVE FROM TRADITIONAL SOURCES. 
-6-
11, THE COMMUNITY HEALTH PROGRAM PROVIDES HEALTH
SERVICES IN THE COMMUNITY WHERE PEOPLE LIVE OR WORK
AS DISTINCT FROM THOSE AVAILABLE IN HOSPITALS AND
SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS. COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES HELP
PEOPLE MEET THEIR HEALTH AND WELFARE NEEDS AT
CONVENIENT LOCATIONS AND TO RETURN HOME AFTER ATTENDENCES.
THIS LESSENS DEPENDENCE ON INSTITUTIONS AND FREQUENTLY
PRESENTS AN ALTERNATIVE TO GOING TO HOSPITAL.
THE GOULBURN COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE IN
MONTAGUE" STREET WAS OPENED IN APRIL LAST YEAR, IT IS
READY TO HELP EVERYONE WITHOUT. RESTRICTION OR COST.
IT COOPERATES WITH, BUT DOESN'T DUPLICATE, OTHER
HEALTH AND WELFARE AGENCIES. IT SEEKS TO INVOLVE
THE PEOPLE-IN MAINTAINING GOOD HEALTH AND HYGIENE,
THE CENTRE COST $ 57,000 LAST YEAR. WE HAVE $ 65 MILLION
IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET FOR OUR COMMUNITY HEALTH AND
MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.
12. THERE ARE OTHER PROGRAMS HELPING GOULBURN
AND THIS DISTRICT. UNDER THE NATIONAL SEWERAGE PROGRAM
WE PROVIDED $ 100,000 LAST FINANCIAL YEAR FOR THE
GOULBURN TREATMENT WORKS. THE RED SCHEME, WHICH WE ARE
NOW SCALING DOWN, HAS . HELPED 16 LOCAL PROJECTS. WE
HOPE TO EXTEND THE AUSTRALIAN LEGAL AID OFFICE TO
GOULBURN BY USING THE SERVICES OF A LAWYER FROM CANBERRA,
,/ 7 
13. 1 PASS NOW TO SOME COMMENTS ON EDUCATION
BECAUSE IT IS YOUR CHIEF CONCERN AS STUDENTS AND IN MANY
WAYS IT HAS BEEN OUR CHIEF'CONCERN AS A GOVERNMENT.
SINCE MAY 1973 WE HAVE HAD FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE FUNDING OF ALL COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND
TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS, MANY PEOPLE HAVE THE IMPRESSION
THAT THE GOVERNMENT' S REFORMS , IN EDUCATION HAVE BEEN
CONFINED. TO PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ALONE:
THAT IS NJOT SO. IT IS TRUE THAT OUR FIR ST PRIORITY WAS
IN THESE,-AREAS BECAUSE THESE WERE THE AREAS OF GREATEST
NEED. OUR PLANS, HOWEVER, ARE . DIRECTED ACROSS THE
WHOLE SPECTRUM OF EDUCATION. WE REGARD ALL LEVELS
AND SEGMENTS OF EDUCATION AS PARTS OF A CONTINUING
AND ALL-EMBRACING PROCESS. MOREOVER, THERE HAS BEEN NO
SLACKENING IN OUR EFFORTS. WE HAVE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS.
OUR BUDGET IS REDUCING THE GROWTH OF GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE.
BUT OUR COMMITMENT TO EDUCATION IS UNIMPAIRED AND UNDIMINISHED.
WE ARE KEEPING FAITH WITH THE TEACHERS, THE STUDENTS.-
THE CHILDREN, THE EDUCATORS WHO LOOKED TO THIS GOVERNMENT
FOR GREAT AND PERMANENT REFORMS I-N AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION.
OUR TOTAL OUTLAYS FOR EDUCATION IN THIS BUDGET ARE
$ 1908 MILLION AN INCREASE OF $ 237 MILLION OVER LAST YEAR. 
i14, I QUOTE FROM THE TREASURER'S BUDGET SPEECH:
IN THE FIRST FULL YEAR OF OFFICE OF THIS GOVERNMENT,*
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION ALMOST
DOUBLED. LAST YEAR, IT ALMOST DOUBLED AGAIN,
WE HAVE THEREFORE ALMOST QUADRUPLED EXPENDITURE
ON EDUCATION IN THESE TWO YEARS, AND WE ARE MAINTAINING
IN 1975-76 THE HIGH LEVEL OF EXPENDITURE NOW REACHED.
THIS ADVA~ NCE SINCE 1972-73 REFLECTS OUR DETERMINATION
TO MAKE OOD THE RELATIVE NEGLECT OF EARLIER YEARS.
OUR INITIATIVES INCLUDE PRONOUNCED INCREASES
IN EXPENDITURE ON SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS COLLEGES;
EXPANSION OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION; ACCEPTANCE.
QF FULL FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION
THROUGHOUT . AUSTRALIA; ABOLITION OF FEES FOR TERTIARY
AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW
STUDENT ASSISTANCE MEASURES; AND ! NCREASED ACADEMIC SALARIES
ADOPTED ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE ACADEMIC SALARIES
TRIBUNAL, WITH EFFECT FROM OCTOBER 1974."
IN OUR APPROACH TO EDUCATION WE ARE TREATING
COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION AND INSTITUTES OF'
TECHNOLOGY IN A MORE ENLIGHTENED WAY RECOGNISING THEIR
UNIQUE AND INDISPENSABLE PLACE IN THE EDUCATIONAL
CONTINUUM AND DISPELLING FOREVER THE IGNORANT IMPRESSION
THAT THEY WERE POOR RELATIONS OF UNIVERSITIES.-a I / 9 
16. WE BELIEVE THAT THE ESSENTIAL QUALITY OF A
DYNAMIC AND. DEMOCRATIC EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IS DIVERSITYBUT
A DIVERSITY OF EQUAL AND RELATED PARTS, EVERYONE
SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE TO THE FULL IN THE
TYPE OF EDUCATION THAT'SUITS HIM BEST. EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
IN EDUCATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT EVERYONE SHOULD HAVE
THE SAME EDUCATION OR THAT EVERYONE SHOULD WANT THE
SAME EDUCATION.' ONE OF OUR MISTAKES IN THE PAST WAS
TO PLACE TOO HIGH A SOCIAL PREMIUM ON CERTAIN KINDS
OF EDUcA-lriON AT THE EXPENSE OF THE COMMUNITY' S NEEDS.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY MEANS THAT THE SAME STANDARDS OF
EXCELLENCE, OF PROFESSIONAL DEDICATION, OF MATERIAL
ENDOWMENT, OF TEACHING SKILLS SHOULD APPLY IN WHATEVER
INSTITUTION AN INDIVIDUAL CHOOSES. OF COURSE PEOPLE
6HOULD BE FREE TO CHOOSE THE KIND OF EDUCA TION THEY
WANT, BUT THIS CHOICE MUST BE ONE BETWEEN SYSTEMS AND
COURSES; BUT BETWEEN STANDARDS, NOT BETWEEN A GOOD
EDUCATION AND A BAD ONE, AN EXPENSIVE EDUCATION OR A
POOR ONE, A SOCIALLY ESTEEMED EDUCATION OR ONE THAT IS
SOCIALLY DOWNGRADED. THE PURPOSE OF my GOVERNMENT'S
REFORMS HAS BEEN TO ENTRENCH THIS GENIUNE PRINCIPLE OF
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, NOT IN A NARROW FINANCIAL SENSE,
BUT AS A BROAD PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLE BINDING ON US
AND ON ALL FUTURE GOVERNMENTS. / 8.10. 
17. OUR OPPONENTS GIVE A SPECIAL, NARROW
DEFINITION TO " EQUAL OPPORTUNITY" EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
-IN EDUCATION FOR THEM MEANS THAT EVERYONE HAS AN EQUAL
OPPORTUNITY TO GO TO PRIVATE SCHOOLS OR UNIVERSITIES
IF THEY CAN AFFORD IT. OUR OPPONENTS HAVE SAID THAT THE
BUDGET PENALISES THOSE WHO WANT TO PROVIDE A DIFFERENT
KIND OF EDUCATION FOR THEIR CHILDREN. WHAT IN FACT THE
BUDGET DOES IS REMOVE A TOTALLY UNJUSTIFIED SUBSIDY FROM
THE WHOLE COMMUNITY FOR A MINORITY WHO ARE WEALTHY ENOUGH)
TO ATTRACT THE SUBSIDY. EQUAL OPPORTUNITY FOR US MEANS
JUST THAT: EVERYONE HAS A RIGHT TO THE BEST SECONDARY
EDUCATION AND THE BEST TERTIARY EDUCATION, WHATEVER HIS
FINANCIAL MEANS. My GOVERNMENT HAS ABOLISHED FEES FOR
TERTIARY EDUCATION OF ALL KINDS AND HAS PROVIDED MUCH*
MORE GENEROUS'STUDENT ALLOWANCES, UNDER A LABOR GOVERNMENT
THERE WILL NEVER BE ANY RESTRICTION ON ANYONE SEEKING
TERTIARY. EDUCATION WHOSE ABILITIES EQUIP HIM FOR SUCH A COURSE.
18. IT IS NOT ONLY IN EDUCATION THAT THE WHOLE
PRINCIPLE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE
BEHIND ALL my GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAMS IS UNDER THREAT.
MEDIBANK IS THREATENED. A FAIR AND EQUITABLE TAX SYSTEM
GIVING REBATES OF EQUAL VALUE TO EVERY TAXPAYER, IS THREATENED.
THE COMMUNITY AID PROGRAMS I HAVE ALREADY DESCRIBED TO YOU
ARE THREATENED. THE AUSTRALIAN LEGAL AID OFFICE IS THREATENED.
MANY OF OUR PROGRAMS FOR SPECIAL REGIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR
GRANTS TO SPORT, RECREATION, THE ENVIRONMENT, THE
NATIONAL ESTATE, FOR CHILD CARE, FOR A HOST OF PROJECTS ARE
UNDER CHALLENGE IN THE COURTS BY THE ANTI-LABOR STATES.. ./ 11 
11.,
THE STATES CHALLENGED THE REDS SCHEME IN THE COURTS.
WE HAD THE ' FARCIAL SITUATION THE OTHER DAY OF PREMIERS
COMPLAINING AT THE SCALING DOWN OF THE REDS PROGRAM
WHICH THEY THEMSELVES HAVE SOUGHT TO DEMOLISH BY A
COURT CHALLENGE, THEY WANT US TO CONTINUE A SCHEME
WHICH THEY HAVE TRIED TO DESTROY.
19.* AS A GOVERNMENT WE OWE A DEBT TO THE STUDENTS
OF THIS COUNTRY. STUDENTS AND THE LABOR PARTY HAVE LONG
BEEN IN THE FOREFRONT OF POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS, IT WAS
STUDENT CONCERN, STUDENT ACTIVfSM, STUDENT PROTEST, THAT
HELPED DRAMATISE MANY GREAT POLITICAL ISSUES AND BRING
THEM TO PUBLIC ATTENTION. MY. GOVERNMENT'S VICTORIES
IN 1972 AND 19714 WERE DUE IN LARGE PART TO THE SUPPORT
OF STUDENTS AND YOUNG PEOPLE. WE HAVE ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT SUPPORT. No GOVERNMENT HAS DONE MORE FOR THE YOUTH
OF THIS COUNTRY IN GIVING THE VOTE TO 18-YEAR-OLDS,
IN ABOLISHING CONSCRIPTION, IN SUPPORTING THE ARTS, IN
REMOVING ALL FEES FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, IN UPGRADING
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES OF EVERY KIND. THESE WERE THE
ACHIEVEMENTS OF A VIGOROUS GOVERNMENT. A GOVERNMENT OF ACTION
AND IDEALISM. WE NEED THE SAME VIGOUR AND IDEALISM AMONG
STUDENTS OF TODAY8 THE GREAT ISSUES OF CONSCIENCE ARE BY
NO MEANS ALL BEH . IND US. ONE VERY GREAT ISSUE REMAINS:
IT IS NOTHING LESS THAT THE SURVIVAL OF OUR DEMOCRATIC
INSTITUTIONS, THE THREAT TO-THESE INSTITUTIONS FROM CONSTANT
ATTACKS ON CONSTITUTIONAL PRACTICE AND DEMOCRATIC CONVENTIONS,
THE CONSCIENCE OF AN ALERT STUDENT COMMUNITY MUST RE69L
THESE THREATS TO DEMOCRACY. / 12 
12.
I HOPE STUDENTS EVERYWHERE WILL REMEMBER THEIR GREAT
TRADITIONS OF DISSENT AND JOIN US IN RESISTING THREATS
TO DEMOCRACY FROM WHATEVER SOURCE, IN WHATEVER GUISE,
THEY MIGHT COME. 



EMBARGO LEm ue
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, M. P
AT THE PAPUA NEW GUINEA INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATIONS,
PORT MORESBY, 16 SEPTEMBER 1975
This is a day that will live in history.
There can never be a more important day in a
nation's history, than its birthday. But the significance
of this day in the broad sweep of history goes beyond even
that for Papua New Guinea, for Australia, for our region
and for the Commonwealth of Nations around the world.
Today Australia, herself once a group of colonies,
has ended the role as a colonial power imposed upon her
by an irony of history. Australid could never be truly
free until Papua New Guinea was truly free. In a very real
sense, this is a day of liberation for Australia as much
as for Papua New Guinea.
iFurther, Australia has today finally discharged
her mandate from the old League of Nations and her
trusteeship to the United Nations.
The presence of the heir to the Crown reminds
us that Papua New Guinea is the last of the significant
nations to be newly created under the authority of that
crown the final act in that remarkable process so
brilliantly inaugurated by his great-uncle Lord Mountbatten,
28 years ago. Nothing became the life of that Empire more
than the manner of their -leaving it.
I came here two days ago as the last Australian
Prime Minister to visit a Papua New Guinea constitutionally
linked to Australia. At midnight last night I became
the first Australian Prime Minister to visit the new nation
of Papua New Guinea. I accept the change of status with
complete equanimity. It is good for the soul, in these
, times which try men's souls.
Let me congratulate your Government, Mr Prime
Minister, on the excellent arrangements made to allow us
all to take part in your indepe ' ndence celebrations. The
ceremonies, the feastivities, the displays all quite
. splendid. And I noticed the excellent security arrangements.
In fact, I haven't felt so well protected since our first
meeting five and a half years ago January 1970 in the
lounge of the Sepik Motel in Wewak. The Australian security
eavesdropped on our subversive talk and well they might,
for we were talking about early self-government and early
independence for Papua New Guinea. We brought great
criticism, even ridicule and contempt, upon us in those far
off days a whole five and ahYalf years ago when together
we first stated that the independence of Papua New Guinea
was imminent and inevitable. / 12 
I said then that independence for Papua New
Guinea was an idea whose time had come and nothing could
resist the power of that idea. In you, Mr Prime Minister,
Papua New Guinea found a man whose time.. has come.
In the event, Papua New Guinea's independence
was her own deicsion and this day for independence was
decided by her own House of Assembly a modern, single
chamber parliament with equal electorates indeed,. an
example for other parliaments. Her Constitution, was not
devised in another land or imposed by foreigners.
It emerged from her own democratic processes, from within
her own democratic institutions, from her own people and
their elected representatives. It has been a remarkable
demonstration of political maturity.
Mr Prime Minister, our two nations cannot ignore
and escape our historical links, our geographic proximity,
the past we share, the future we share. I am convinced
neither of ups wish or will ever wish to do so. At yesterday's
flag lowerii~ g ceremony, Sir John Guise stressed that the
Australia flag was being lowered, not torn down. This
spirit, the strength of which comes from a shared past in
peace, in war, is a firm foundation for our future relationship.
Australia wants the closest possible relationship
with her nearest neighbour, the new nation of Papua New
Guinea. A relationship of equals, based on mutual respect,
understanding and trust. That trust, that understanding
and that respect, is necessary for us to develop a
rela~ tionship which will go well beyond normal diplomatic ties.
This does not mean that we seek an exclusive
relationship with Papua New Guinea. On the contrary, we
recognise and appreciate that you will want to find your own
place in the international community, based on your
own independent assessment. The independence which we
celebrate today is a genuine independence not a phoney
independence. The Australian Government has stressed that a
united and independent Papua New Guinea will continue to
have first call on Australia'expanding aid program.
I re-affirm that pledge in the strongest possible terms;
te-af firm it with the full support of the Australian Government,
the full support of the Australian political parties, the
full support of the Australian people. I give a categorical
and unequivocal assurance to the Government and people of
Papua New Guinea that this nation will continue to have first
call on our expanding aid program.
Mr Prime Minister, tonight, I also want to
re-affirm. the Australian Government's absolute, unqualified
support for a united Papua New Guinea. Even when there was
disagreement in Australia about the time-table for independence
there was never any disagreement on this fundamental objective.
Australia's policy over the years of bringing a united Papua
New Guinea to independence has been supported by the overwhelming
majority of your elected representative. It is a policy which 
has been endorsed by the United Nations many times as
recently as three weeks ago by the Trusteeship Council. Indeed,
it was the fun ' damental condition of Australia's trusteeship.
Representatives of the Trusteeship Council, of the Committee
of Twenty Four and of the United Nations Secretary-General
are here for the celebrations. It is more than the hope of
Australia, the hope of Papua New Guinea it is the world's
hope for Papua New Guinea and, one might pray, the hope of
the universal church.
On an occasion like this its hard to avoid
euphoria, the feeling of unqualified optimism, particularly
when so much of all that we hoped for, worked for, fought
for, has been achieved is now a, living fact. It seems
almost churlish to remind ourselves that there are
difficulties, dangers, pitfalls ahead. But, of course,
that is alsq a fact. It is in the nature of things.
In particular Papua New Guinea * is embarking on that most
difficult of all courses that effort to make democracy
work. Nowh~ re in the world is this man's noblest experimentaltogether
beyond challenge, beyond the possibility of failure.
The particular forms, the techniques, the institutions
by which democracy can prevail are always subject to development
and change. Each nation will make its own experiment, its
own choices. The substance of democracy, however, can be
achieved if we keep in mind its basic aim the aim set out
by the first group of colonies to achieve independence, 199
years ago, now the United States of America that all men are
born equal and have equal rights to life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. In the great task ahead Papua New Guinea will
have many friends. Australia, of course; Australia firm and
unswerving in her friendship. But the representative presence
in this room of so many of the nations of the world is a sure
sign. that of all the great strengths which this nation enjoysthe
strength of her people, the strengths of their diverse and
rich cultures, the strength of her leaders not least is3
the strength of the friendship she has throughout the region
and the world. 



S HOBART PRESS CLUB
22 SEPTEMBER 19751
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER N C
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Thank you for giving me an opportunity again, directly
and personally, and in these hospitable surroundings, to speak
to the representatives of the Tasmanian Press. There's
one particular point I want to make to you today: that is
that the Australian Government is determined to remove the
handicap of isolation which Tasmania suffers as Australia's
only island State. Of necessity this is a long-term aim. it
will not be achieved by temporary measures. Our policies
are therefore designed to redress the basic handicap of
separation from the mainland by attacking the fundamental
problem on the basis of the best available advice and
information. This has been a difficult year economically as you
all know. Our economic problems the problems which Australia
shares with every comparable country have not made our task
in Tasmania any easier. our Budget last month recognised
the need for a steady, continuing attack on inflation. We
therefore decided that a sharp reduction in the growth of
Government expenditure was needed. I emphasise, however,
that in cutting back this rate of growth the Australian
Government has bden generous, and will remain generous, in its
outlays to the States. While we have imposed restraints on
our own spending we have been reluctant to compel the States
to do likewise, though naturally we expect that the same
spirit of restraint will be observed by them. In point of
fact, as Mr Hayden said in his Budget speech last month,
we estimate that the financial assistance grants payable to
the States this financial year will total about $ 3,185 million,
an increase' of $ 811 million, an increase of 34.2 per cent
over the grants paid by the Australian Government to the
State Governments last financial year. This is on the basis
of the improvements in financial arrangements which we
undertook at'-the Premiers' Conference in June. So while no
State Government may get as much from the Australian
Government to spend as it would like they will all enjoy
a much bigger increase in their expenditure than the
Australian Government has so'ught or allowed for itself.
Now to come back to Tasmania. We recognise that the
chief problem is in transport. I undertook in November 1972
that an Australian Labor Government would ensure that surface
freight between Hobart and Melbourne would cost no more per
ton mile, no more per tonne per kilometre than the surface
freight between Melbourne and her other neighbouring capitals
on the mainland, Sydney and Adelaide. Because previous
Australian Governments had allowed the Inter-State Commission
ordained in the Constitution to expire and had not persevered
with proposals to reestabli~ sh it, the Government didn't have
the necessary information available to it. We accordingly
appointed Mr Nimmo as a Royal Commissioner to inquire into
and report upon the whole subject. We expect his report
in December or January. He commenced writing it earlier
this month. The Commissioner has indicated that the issues 
are so complex and inter-related that an interim report on
any one aspect of his inquiries would serve little purpose.
It's an enormous inquiry. Mr Nimmo has collected information
from more than 140 firms, he has received 84 written
submissions, he has interviewed 185 individuals and representatives
of organisations. Evidence was given by 87 witnesses
at the public hearing. He has inspected ferry services
between the Eastern provinces of Canada-to Prince Edward
Island and Newfoundland from the mainland-and also ferry
services across the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. The
Government will be considering his report as soon as it is
received. Meantime , the Australian Government has made and will
make no increases in northbouna AWL freight rates. This
policy and the subsidy on ANL passenger services across
Bass Strait will cost Australian taxpayers $ 6 to $ 7 million
this financial year. Now, I know people constantly say, not
enough. Therefore allow me to make at least this political
point. The previous Liberal Federal Governments gave no
financial assistance to these services at all. My Government
is levying from Australian taxpayers as a whole $ 6 to $ 7
million this year for this purpose.
Incidentally, nobody prevents other lines providing a
service. It's completely legal to do so. But it's increasingly
being left to the ANL.
In one respect, the price of wheat, Tasmania has for
long been placed on the same footing as the mainland States.
' the taxpayers, however, are paying more than they should to
support this policy because no Tasmanian port is equ pped
to service an adequate ship for the wheat trade. The
matter has now come to a head. The ship hitherto used to
deliver the wheat to Tasmania, the North Esk, has reached
the end of its life. It is coming up for its survey and all
the indications are that the survey will disclose so much
would have to be done to it that it wouldn't be an economic
proposition. The Tasmanian Government has been advised by
Pak Poy and the Australian Government has been advised by
AWL that a bulk ship is the proper ship for this trade.
The ANL has several suitable, bulk ships already. There is
however, no Tasmanian port w; hich can so far handle such a
bulk ship. It's urgent to equip one of the Tasmanian ports
to handle a wheat ship, a bulk ship, a modern ship; presumably* it'd be
Bell Bay. In fact, Bell Bay should logically be the focus
of Tasmania's sea, rail and road links with the mainland.
The real significance of the acquisition of the
Tasmanian Government Railways by the Australian National
Railways lies in this context of better transport links with
the mainland. With the res. ponsibility for rail services
within the State and the responsibility for most sea services
across the Strait reposing-in the national Government there
will for the first time be a real effort to coordinate and
dovetail these two essential modes of transport. With the
national Government also accepting its constitutional
responsibility to upgrade roads to the ports what the
Constitution says is, that the Federal Parliament can pass 
with respect to trade and commerce including trade and
commerce by road, with other countries and among the;
States. Accordingly the national Government has always
had the responsibility, although mine is the first
Government to accept the responsibility, to upgrade roads
between States and the ports. Now with us accepting that
responsibility Tasmanians can at last expect their basic
handicap of isolation to be removed. I-' d better say
something about the railways in another context, the
financial context.
The transfer of financial responsibility for your
railways to the Australian Government came into effect
last July on the basis of agreements between Mr Neilson and
myself. In addition to getting a more modern and efficient
railway service and better standards of track and rolling
stock and signaling equipment there will be significant
fianncial advantages for Tasmania. The State will be relieve
of the burden of losses-and inevitably with the equipment
which State Governments seem to be able to get for their
rail ser" Yices, Those losses will mount every year. In
New South Wales the losses are well over $ 200 million this
year and in Victoria they're approaching $ 200. million.
Now with the State being relieved of those losses, it will
also receive an additional $ 3.3 million in financial assistance
and on top of that we pay $ 5 million as a first contribution
in consideration~ of assets.
Another area where the Australian Government can give
particular and much needed help to Tasmania is in urban and
regional development. In the current financial year $ 1.8
million has been provided to Tasmania, if I may mention it
here, for sewerage programs; $ 840Y000 has been provided for
the North-West Tasmanian Water Supply Scheme the first
allocation ' of funds for this purpose. We have allocated
the maximum possible amount of $ 500,000 to set up the
Tasmanian Urban Land Council. And this Council will
administer the land acquisition and development programs
for which generous Australian Government funds will be
available. As you already know well, the Australian Government
is concentrating all its Ant'arctic Activities in Hobart and
is establishing the Australian Maritime College on the Tamar;
the legislation for that will be introduced next month.
The apply and pear industry one of the pillars of-
Tasmania's economy hitherto has received assistance on an
unprecedented scale. You don't know how lucky you are havinq
Senator Wriedt as the minister for Agriculture. We have
continued the fruitgrowing reconstruction scheme and the
stabilisation scheme for growers' returns on exported apples
and pears. The Australian ' and Tasmanian Governments have
agreed jointly to provide supplementary support for apples
exported on an " at risk" basis to the United Kingdom and other
European markets. The purpose is to sustain the viable sector
of the export industry until the Australian Apple and Pear
Corporation established by my Government can develop
alternative markets. I am confident that the Corporation / 4 
will bring new drive and expertise to the promotion of
this industry. In addition, $ 950,000 has been paid so far
to Tasmanian fruitgrowers in post-revaluation adjustment
assistance. The Industries Assistance Commission will be
reporting later this year on apple and pear and other
fruitgrowing reconstruction schemes.
Finally I want to give you some-account of our response
to the Tasman Bridge disaster. The social dislocation caused
by the disaster was so great that remedial measures will
necessarily take longer than at first seemed likely. Our
response has been prompt and generous. The Australian
Government was in no way obliged to rectify the destruction
of the bridge but that hasn't stopped us from doing everything
in our power to do so. People, take all these things for
granted now. No suggestion was ever made under previous
Federal Governments that there should be assistance for
the West Gate Bridge for instance in Melbourne. Now the
Australian Government a joint Tasman Bridge Restoration
Commission has been established by the Australian and
Tasmanian Governments. A very great Tasmanian, Sir Roland
Wilson,-. you remember him as Secretary to the Treasury, and
then chairman of Qantas and of the Commonwealth Bank he
acts as my personal adviser on this matter. A sum of $ 6
million was appropriated by the Australian Parliament for the
period up to. the end of last June; a further $ 13.9 million
has been appropriated for reconstruction, restoration and
ancillary works in the present financial year. The Australian
Government will finance the widening of the bridge during
restoration to provide for five traffic lanes. You will get
a very much better Bridge than you had before.
The Australian Government has undertaken to meet all
the costs of designting and constructing a second bridge and
its approaches over the Derwent River between Dowsings Point
and Cleburne Point. This bridge is estimated to cost $ 21 million
and will have 4 traffic lanes. It will have a vertical
clearance above the river of 15 metres.
In the meantime we have undertaken a range of relief
measures such as the financing of a permanent community
health centre at Bellerive,. assistance with additional ambulance,
fire-fighting, road safety, flaw enforcement and judicial
services on the eastern shore, and assistance with emergency
river crossing facilities. There has been virtually no limit
to our readiness to cooperate with the Tasmanian Government
and that cooperation will continue until community life in
Hobart on both shores is restored to normal. From the ruins
of the Tasman Bridge incomparably better metropolitan
communications will arise. The capital of Tasmania will obtain
better town planning and better civic services because for the
first time there is a national Government which is involved
in urban affairs. 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT 2
HIGH COURT PLAQUE UNVEILING,
CANBERRA, 29 SEPTEMBER ] 975
Mr Minister, Chief Justice, Your Honours, Your
Excellencies, Ladies arnd Gentlemen.
Today for the first time in Au * stralia's history
the High Court of Australia is sitting in Canberra: the
Chief Justice and all the Judges. And on a day like this
it's well to recall how-nobly they have fulfilled one of
their tenets:
Let justice be done even though it Pours,
But take good heart because on this site, one
of Australia's national capital's great buildings will arise.
There will be proper accommodation for the Supreme Court of
this country, and for all those who have business before it.
It may be difficult to envisage, in this tent today,
that the ; public hall of the High Court of Australia, on this
site, will be nearly 80 feet high I was told 24 metres higrh.
Orlas you might expect me to say, 2.4 decamnetres. We've had to
wait three quarters of a century to inaugurate the principal
seat of the High Court of Australia at the seat of Government.
Right from the beginning when the first, one of the greatest
Attorneys-Genera, first introduced the legislation for the
High Court, the Judiciary Act of 1903, it took a long time
to get that piece of legislation through; several sessions
in fact. But, in fact, it did finally get through both Houses.
And right from the outset it was laid down that the principal
geat of the High Court shall be at the seat of Government.
Now, until 1927 they both were seated in Melbourne.
And then the Goverrmient came to Canberra, and now we are
making it possible for the High Court's principal seat to
come to Canberra also.
There are four great pillars of Australia's
constitutional structure. The Constitution says, there
shall be a Federal Executive; there shall be a Federal
Parliament; there shall be a Federal Supreme Court of
Australia, known as the High Court; there shall be an
Interstate Commission. Now ' three, soon, will be
seated in Canberra. Throughout the English speaking world the High
Court of Australia is acknowledged as without superior in
the common law. The Judges who serve there are quoted
increasingly everywhere where the common law has been
inherited as it has been in Australia. I make that commnent
because it is well to recall how much of the business of tChe
High Court; how much of the business that citizens bring
before the High Court, is of the same nature as has been
transacted before English Courts for centuries.. And the
High Court of Australia has contributed to the elucidation
and the development of the common law as much as any court
in the world in this century. ./ 2 
We naturally, in public life, are preoccupied
with the functions of the High Court as a Constitutional Court,
following, of course, the Supreme Court of the United StatCes,
the Supreme Court of Canada and followed, in turn, by the
Supreme Court of India, and the Constitutional Court of West
Germany. Because in Australia, as in the other Federal
Democracies in the world, it has been thought proper that
disputes, which inevitably arise, should be settled in the
rational, properly argued atmosphere of court proceedings.
Here I quote Professor-La Nauze's biography of
Deakin: to explain it, the drive which Deakin brought to his
grand design of having a High Court of Australia established
right from the beginning of our Federation. So many people
thought that it could be put off for years. But not Deakin,
because to quote La Nauze, Deakin believed that:
.1
" without the authority of the High Court the
Commonwealth would be in constant danger from the
forces of provincialism. It was not that he
expected from a High Court judgments which would
0 necessarily favour the Commonwealth at the expense
of the States. What was essential was that
disputes between them should from the earliest
years views of the Federation be examined and
finally settled by a Court, and in a mental
atmosphere, free from provincial association."
I menti'on one other Chief Justice, the present
Chief Justice. It came as no surprise to me, in the Parliament
that Sir Garfield Barwick who had already proved himself a very
great builder when he was the doyen of the profession in Australia
beca'use those of us who then practised at the Sy dney Bar would
remember, with gratitude, how much our-accommodation was improved
because he devoted himself to seeing that the profession was
adequately housed. Without him I doubt if there would have been
adequate Inns foi barristers in Sydney or in due course in
0 Melbourne or elsewhere in Australia. And the Chief Justice, of
course, had the idea that in Sydney the Australian Government
and the New South Wales Government should co-operate in
establishing new courts, so that the public would not be confused
by a dividing, and divided apparently unco-ordinated judicial
system but he has for long been working for the High Court to
be properly housed in its proper seat in Canberra, in a building
worthy of the Supreme Courts, th Constitutional Courts of
common law countries and of federal democracies.
In October 1973,. he was one of the assessors to
choose the successful architects. And on 8 October 1973 he and
I announced the winners. And I think I must say, and in this I
would be supported by the National Capital Development Commission,
and a very great number of people in the profession, as well as
in the administration, that since then Sir Garfield has been
unremitting in seeing that this building proceeded. And I don't
really believe that the plans could have been so far advanced but
for the pressure, completely proper pressure, which he has brought
to bear upon me in this way. 
The building will be a noble one. It may not be as
noble as the Chief Justice might have aspired to have it. But
it's the best that the country can produce or afford and it will
be in a splendid setting, it will be a worthy home for our
Court which stands at the peak of our national judicial system.
And all of us, I believe, on this occasion should pay tribute
to those who over the decades have sought to have this court
in Canberra. And not least to the Chief Justice and the present
Justices who have spurred us to see that within not so many years
three or four the principal seat of the High Court, a noble seat,
will be at the seat of Government. 



SPEECH BY THE PRINE MINISTER,
THE HON. E. G. WHITLAM, OC. M. P.,
FOR THE OPENING OF THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNICAL LIBRARY ( ANSTEL)
CANBERRA 2 OCTOBER 1975
IT IS APPROPRIATE THAT IEXPRESS MY OWN AND THE
GOVERNMENT'S INDEBTEDNESS TO THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY COUNCIL, KENNETH MIYER. THIS IS THE
SECOND OCCASfON IN THE PAST WEEK WHEN IHAVE HAD
CAUSE TO'-ACKNOWLEDGE KEN MYER'S REMARKABLE RECORD OF
PUBLIC SERVICE. IN MIELBOURNE ON M'ONDAY I OPENED AN
EXHIBITION OF CHINESE CRAFTS WHICH THE M'YER STORES
HAVE HELPED B'RI NG To AUSTRALIA.* TODAY KEN MIY ER
PRESIDES AT THE OPENING OF ANSTEL. ON THE ONE HAND
VIE HAVE SEEN HIS CONTRIBUTION TO WIDER PUBLIC ACCESS
TO THE ARTS; ON THIS OCCASION WE ACKNOWLEDGE HIS
CONTRIBUTION TO WIDER PUBLIC ACCESS TO INFORMATION.
THE TWO THINGS ARE BY NO MEANS UNRELATED, BOTH ARE
CONCERNED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MORE INFORMED AND
SENSITIVE COMMUNITY. v &amp;/ 2 3% 1 
2.
OF COURSE MANY PEOPLE APART FROM KEN MYER. HAVE
HAD A PART IN PLANNING AND CREATING THIS LIBRARY.
THE OPENING OF ANSTEL A LIBRARY WITHIN A LIBRARY
IS A MOST IMPORTANT STEP IN THE PROVISION OF INFORMATION
SERVICES TO THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE. THE AUSTRALIAN
NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL LIBRARY IS THE
FIRST PHASE IN THE REDEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY AS AN OPEN INFORMATION SERVICE, REACHING OUT
THROUGH ITS ATSOCIATED ORGANISATIONS TO THE WHOLE
AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY, PROVIDING INFORMATION OF EVERY
KIND TO EVERYONE WHO NEEDS IT.
WHAT WE ARE SEEING TODAY ARL THE BEGINNINGS OF
A WHOLE NEW CONCEPT OF WHAT A LIBRARY SHOULD BE AND
HOW A LIBRARY SHOULD FUNCTION. IN RECENT YEARS THERE
HAS BEEN A QUIET REVOLUTION IN THE PLANNING AND
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN AUSTRALIA, WE HAVE COME
TO SEE THAT THE TRADITIONAL CONCEPT OF THE LIBRARY
AN ISOLATED AND SELF-CONTAINED COLLECTION OF BOOKS
IS WHOLLY INADEQUATE TO THE NEEDS OF MODERN SOCIETY,
ACCESS TO THE TRADITIONAL LIBRARY IS LIMITED, AND EVEN
WHERE ACCESS IS POSSIBLE, THE INFORMATION AVAILABLE IS
OFTEN HAPHAZARD OR INADEQUATE. THE QUALITY OF LIBRARY
SERVICES VARIES FROM STATE TO STATE, FROM CITY TO CITY,
AND BETWEEN CITY AND COUNTRY. MArjY AUSTRALIANS ARE
STILL WITHOUT LIBRARIES OF ANY KIND. 61./ 3 
3.
THE SERVICES OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY ARE
DJESIGNED TO OVERCOME ALL THESE PROBLEMS LIMITATION OF
ACCESS, INSUFFICIENCY OF INFORMATION, INEQUALITY OF
SERVICE. HS PROBLEMS HAVE BEEN ESPECIALLY APPARENT
IN FIELDS WHERE THERE IS A RAPID GROWTH OF KNOWLEDGE
AND A-HIGH DEGREE OF SPECIALISATION. THEY HAVE BEEN
COMPOUNDED BY RIVALRY BETWEEN ESTABLISHED LIBRARY
SERVICES AND INSTITUTIONS. IN THE SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNOLOGICAL ArAA, FOR EXAMPLE, DIFFERENT BODIES
SUCH AS THc CSIROI THE ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION, VARIOUS
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAVE
ALL PROVIDED LIBRARY AND. INFORMATION SERVICES WHOSE
FUNCTIONS HAVE TENDED TO OVERLAP, ALL THESE SERVICES
HAVE BEEN VALUABLE AND TO SOME EXTENT NECESSARY
THEY WILL CERTAINLY CONTINUE BUT THEIR COMPETITION
FOR CUSTOM AND RESOURCES HAS NOT MADE OUR INFORMATION
SERVICES MORE. EFFICIENT. FOR THESE AND OTHER REASONSINCLUDING
A -ENERAL NEGLECT OF LIBRARIES By GOVERNMENTS
IN THE PAST -LIBRARY SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA HAVE
LAGGED WELL BEHIND THOSE OF OTHER COMPARABLE COUNTRIES.
IT IS TIME IVE CAUGHT UP, WE ARE CATCHING UP NOW, I I-/ 7 
4.
BETTER LIBRARIES AND MORE CONSISTENT STANDARDS
OF LIBRARY SERVICE WILL NOT BE ACHIEVED BY THE DUPLICATION
OF TRADITIONAL LIBRARY MATERIALS IN EVERY CITY AND TOWN
WHERE LIBRARIES ARE NEEDED. THIS WOULD BE HOPELESSLY
COSTLY AND INEFFICIENT. YET THIS HAS BEEN THE
APPROACH IN THE PAST. TODAY OUR APPROACH IS DIFFERENT.
WE HAVE RECOGNISED THE NEED FOR CENTRALISED INFORMATION
SERVICES OFFERING THE WIDEST POSSIBLE ACCESS TO
INTERESTED PEOPLE AND ORGANISATIONS. " CENTRALISED"
OF COURSE IS A DIRTY WORD, BUT IT WILL BE CLEAR FROM WHAT
I HAVE TO SAY THAT THE THEORY INVOLVES NO DEROGATION
FROM THE PRINCIPLE OF LOCAL COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT.
SWITH THE USE OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY AND MODERN COMMUNICATIONS
1
QUICK AND RELIABLE; ACCESS TO INFORMATION IS POSSIBLE
ANYW1HERE IN AUSTRAIA.
WITH THIS IN MIND, THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
COUNCIL APPOITED A COMMITTEE THE SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNICAL INFOR&gt; ATION SERVICES ENQUIRY COMMITTEE ( STISEC)
TO STUDY NATIONWIDE NEEDS FOR LIBRARY-BASED INFORMATION.
lY GOVERNMENT ACCEPTED THE COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATION
THAT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY SHOULD HAVE PRIORITY IN THE
REFORM OF LIBRARY SERVICES, OTHER SPECIALISED LIBRARY
SERVICES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES AND HUMANITIES WILL BE
DEVELOPED LATER. THEY HAVE ALREADY BEEN STARTED.
MEANWHILE, WITH THE OPENING OF ANSTEL, THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY IS PROVIDING A VALUABLE NEW SERVICE TO THE
SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY. m 
SOME 80,000 SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL
MONOGRAPHS ARE ON OPEN ACCESS THROUGH ANSTEL's COMPUTERBASED
INFORMATION SERVICE. THEY WILL ENABLE THE STAFF*
I TO ANSWER INQUIRIES FROM USERS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
THEY WILL HELP AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
AND AGENCIES OBTAIN PROMPT ACCESS TO THE LATEST
INFORMATION ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, IN ADDITION,
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY WILL BE ABLE TO MAKE MUCH BETTER
USE OF THE 25,000 SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL PERIODICALS
IT RECEIVES FROM AROUND THE WORLD. ANSTEL's FIRST
PUBLICATION IS A LIST OF THESE PERIODICALS. OTHER
LIBRARIES AND ORGANISATIONS WILL BE ABLE TO OBTAIN
COPIES OF ANY PERIODICALS THEY NEED'i: FROM THE iIATIONAL
LIBRARY. I CAN PERHAPS ILLUSTRATE THE VALUE OF THIS
SERVICE BY CONSIDERING, SAY, THE NEEDS OF A MEDICAL
SPECIALIST I0 HOBART. IN THE PAST, EVERY HOSPITAL WOULD
TRY TO OBTAIN ALL THE SPECIALIST JOURNALS NEEDED BY ITS
STAFF. THIS WAS A DIFFICULT TASK AT THE BEST OF TIMES;
TODAY IT IS VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE. IT IS BETTER FOR EVERY
INSTITUT. ION TO HAVE ACCESS TO'A COMPLETE REFERENCE SYSTEM,
A CENTRAL INFORI. ATION LIBRARY WILL OPERATE THE SERVICE
AND ISSUE TO EACH SPECIALIST A LIST OF EVERY ARTICLE
OR PUBLICATION THAT APPEARS IN THE WORLD DEALING WITH HIS
SUBJECT, THIS IS NOT TO SAY THAT A LIBRARY SUCH AS ANSTEL
WILL DO EVERYTH IG ITSELF. AND THAT THERE WILL BE NO NEED
FOR OTHER ORGANISATIONS TO DEVELOP THEIR OWN LIBRARY SERVICES. / 6 
6.
IT MEANS THAT OTHER ORGANISATIONS INCLUDING OTHER LIBRARIES
WILL BE ABLE TO PLAN THEIR SERVICES MORE EFFECTIVELY.
IT WILL ENCOURAGE CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION RATHER
THAN RIVALRY BETWEEN INFORMATION SERVICES. INDEED,
THIS PROCESS OF CO-ORDINATION IS AN INTERNATIONAL ONE,
LIBRARIES AROUND THE WORLD CAN SUPPLY INFORMATION TO A
COMPUTER-BASED SYSTEM. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAS ALREADY
HAD VALUABLE ASSISTANCE FROM CANADA IN THIS REGARD.
SI SHOULD MAKE IT CLEAR THAT WHILE ANSTEL ITSELF
IS AN INNOVATION, COMPUTER-BASED LIBRARY INFORMATION
SERVICES ARE ALREADY WELL ESTABLISHED HERE AT THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY. . THE PROCESS OF REFORMING AND
MODERNISING OUR LIBRARY SERVICES HAS BEEN STEADILY GOING
AHEAD. THERE ARE ALREADY MORE THAN 5,000 USERS OF THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY'S COMIPUTER-BASED SERVICES. THE SUCCESS
OF ANSTEL AND OTHER MODERN INFORMATION SERVICES DEPENDS
ON THE SUPPORT AND CO-OPERATION OF MANY INTERESTED GROUPS
AND THE READINESS CF LIBRARIES THEMSELVES TO WORK
TOGETHER. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY HAS ESTABLISHED A FUND
FOR INTER-LIBRARY CO-OPERATION. THROUGH THE GENEROSITY
AND GOOD OFFICES OF KEN 11YER, THE FUND HAS ALREADY REACHED
$ 100,000. THE NATIONAL LIBRARY WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO
PROVIDE LIBRARY SERVICES EVERYWHERE ON THE SPOT, BUT IT
WILL BE ABLE TO PROVIDE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS AND STATE
LIBRARIES WITH THE TOOLS AND THE RESOURCES NECESSARY TO
MEET THE COMMUNITY'S N'EEDS. / 7 
r7.
SUPPORT FOR LIBRARIES HAS BEEN ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT, YET ONE OF THE LEAST KNOWN, ASPECTS OF MY
GOVERNMENT'S WORK. IN MARCH THIS YEAR I ANNOUNCED THE
APPOINTMENT OF A WIDE-RANGING COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
INTO PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN AUSTRALIA, IT HAS HELD
MORE THAN 20 PUBLIC HEARINGS. WE ARE GIVING DIRECT
ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO IMPROVE LIBRARY
SERVICES. WE ARE IMPROVING SCHOOL AND TERTIARY
EDUCATION LIBRARIES IN A NUMBER OF WAYS. OUR COMMITMENT
TO LIBRARIES COULD NOT HAVE BEEN BETTER SYmBOLISED
THAN IT WAS IN THE CHOICE OF A GIFT FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE TO PAPUA NEW GUINEA
ON THE OCCASION OF INDEPENDENCE. O'bR GIFT WILL TAKE
THE FORM OF A NATI&amp; NAL LIBRARY BUILDING AND
ASSOCIATED BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT.
THE GOVERNMENT'S BASIC OBJECTIVE IS NOT JUST
TO PROVIDE t1ORE BOOKS AND BETTER BUILDINGS BUT TO
RATIONALISE LIBRARY.. SERVICE EVERYWHERE AND ENSURE THAT
0 WHEREVER AUSTRALIANS LIVE THEY HAVE THE SAME ACCESS
TO EVERYTHING A LIBRARY CAN PROVIDE WORKS OF
LITERATU RE, CULTURAL ENRICHMEN4' T, CONTACT WITH HISTORIC
BOOKS AND DOCUMENTS, AND INFORMATION OF EVERY KIND. 
8.
WHEN WE THINK ABOUT IT WE WILL SEE WHAT AN
EXTRAORDINARY AND, INDEED, REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPT THIS IS.
IN ANY DEMOCRACY, INFORMATION IS THE KEY TO AN INFORMED
AND ALERT COMMUNITY A COMMUNITY THAT IS READY AND
ABLE TO TAKE ITS OWN DECISIONS AND PARTICIPATE IN THE
DEMOCRATIC PROCESS, WE TAKE FREEDOM OF SPEECH FOR
GRANTED, BUT. THE ACCOMPANYING FREEDOM, THE NECESSARY
. COROLLARY, FREEDOM OF INFORMATION, HAS LONG BEEN
W NEGLECTED. IN ANY TRULY FREE SOCIETY, FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION IS JUST AS IMPORTANT AS FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
A CITIZEN WHOSE ACCESS TO INFORMATION IS LIMITED
OR RESTRICTED IS A SECOND-CLASS CITIZEN. I BELIEVE
IT WILL BE POSSIBLE, THROUGH THIS GREAT INSTITUTION,
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY, TO GUARANTEE FOR EVERY
AUSTRALIAN NOT JUST THOSE WHO LIVE IN CANBERRA
ACCESS TO INFORMATIOilN OF ANY KIND, WHEREVER HE MAY
LIVE, WHATEVER HIS JOB, WHATEVER HIS INCOME, WHATEVER
HIS EDUCATION., I CAN THINK OF FEW REFORMS THAT
CAN BETTER ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF OUR LIVES, AND
ENTRENCH THE RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF ALL MEMBERS OF
A FREE AND RESPONSIBLE COMMUNITY. 



PRIME MINISTER' S SPEECH AT THE SANDGA'TE BOWLING CLUB,
BRISBANE, 3 OCTOBER 1975
Well, ladies and gentlemen, it was some months
ago that Denis Murphy wrote to me and said will you
launch my book on T. J. Ryan? I want to make that plain
from the outset because this visit was arranged a long
time ago in principle;, the date wasn't necessarily
set Some people will be cynical enough to think
that I mnight1--be here f or some political purpose. I resent
that sort of insinuation( interjection: he's not here
tonight). I'm very glad to be here at the Sandgate Bowls
Club because I've never been on this side of the lagoon.
I would have lost count of all the times I've been'right
round it and looked across, and at last I've made it.
And I thank the presidents very much for. being so gracious
to me, but to all of you. These are excellent premises,
and I can compliment you on the way you look after your
members and guests. Thank you very much indeed.
Now, I've been with Denis Murphy with various
audiences over the last few years at the Homestead the
only time, I want to make it plain to you I ever. go
to the Homestead is to make speeches; I wouldn't go for
any other purpose. On this occasion, of course, it's
entirely a social and literary occasion. I love
li * terary lunches and academic dinners. So naturally
I brought along, I got leave to come f rom Fred Daly,
because we've been in Parliament for over 22 years now,
next month I think it'll be 23 years in my case
but it's 31 years in his he's the father of the
Parliament and he treats us all as wayward children.
Those on our side, of course,. we instinctively love himari-
d those on the other side do as they're told. It has
warm--. ed my heart to see the way you've responded when his
nat:-e was mentioned anybody that can equal Clem and
Sylvia Jones in applause is doing pretty well.
I'm here tonight not to support Denis Murphy
as a candidate,. and he has been an outstanding candidate,
but to support him as an author. I regard him as one of
the finest young men in Australia. He qualified himself
to be a university lecturer by his own efforts he didn't
have a silver spoon, as they say, or whatever it is
and in Queensland you need a pretty long spoon. But he
qualified himself in a very competitive field and I
don't know where he finds the time to conduct so many other
activities. He' s written several books; they are excellent
books. The Department of History in the University of
Queensland is outstanding in Australia because of its
concern with Australian history. You know, whenI used to
go to university, people would be a bit inclined to say that
Australian history wasn't really a subject that you could
learn at university. But the University of Queensland has
disproved that. Arind there's another field where I think the
University of * Queensland Press is outstanding.' More than
any other publisher in Australia it publishes Australian
verse. Now we have some good history here and we write
some good verse. We have very good politicians in the
British de-mocratic tradition. I mean from time to time, I'm not 
saying that they're all..
But of course: I always remember the good times, I talk
about the best. And there have beenL soine very good ones.
And also the verse, and the literat[_ ure we produce in
Australia is equal to any produced anywhere in the
English-speaking world. We ought to be pleased.
I am very happy to be at the launching of another
publication of the University of Queensland Press.
You'll notice that I'm using ' press'; I'm praising the
press in a very specialised sense.
Now Denis Murphy has had a most interesting
and admirable subject for this biography. Whatever they
might say about the reception that the press in the wider
sense gives the Australian Labor Party there's no
question the way historians regard it,~ because everybody
who writes about Australian politics this century,
writes about it in the context of what the Labor Party
has done or has aimed to do. If one looks to the past,
everybody, whatever his politics, would acknowledge
that the Labor party has been the creative and dynamic
force in Australian public life. Now people don't
necessarily believe it at any particular time they
didn't believe it when it was happening in the past.
But when it'S been achieved, when the, look back, they
all say, that is., there is nothing when people look at
Australian politics, which-: they identify with anti-Labor
politicians, or anti-Labor Governments. It's all been
in terms of what Labor politicians or Labor governments
have done. One of the charming things, reading Ryan"
is the way that in the second decade of this century all the
things were said about his government and about himself,
which are said by his successors today. All the terms
of abuse were already being used disloyal, treacherous,
treasonable, anti-monarch, and disloyal, everything like
this. The only phrase of all the ont-s which are used
about us now which was, which is with all the terms which
are used about us now, were all used in T. J. Ryan's day.
The only one that they used to use about him which we,
never copped was the word ' bolshevik'. But otherwise the
terms of abuse are precisely the same; it's most comforting
Those were the days when in Queensland the Premiers , in stead
of just standing off and hurling abuse , decided to go and
get into the action themselves. And two of Queensland's
Premiers-the ablest of them this century, Ryan and Theodore
went into the House of Representatives. Ryan died at
there is no question that if he'd lived a normal 20 years
or even more that you would have expected him to have in
Parliament he would have been Prime Minister of Australia.
Now Theodore went in in a bad time, bad economic time,
universal depression throughout the world. But everybody
now acknowledges that Theodore was way ahead of his time;
he was the only person who was a Chancellor or a Treasurer
who read Keynes and all those people that were; I mean we've
gone beyond Keynes now,. but he was* way ahead, the rigours of the
depression would have been very much less if they'd been a
few more people that had heeded Theodore, the former Premier of
Queensland, who became Federal Treasurer. These were very great
men, and of course, previously Griffith and so on in the last 
century were very great men, Premiers of Queensland who
went into Federal af fairs. GriffEith, of course, was a
Minister and then in the High Court, t~ he first Chief
Justice, and a very great one; great Premier, great
literary man too, incidentally, and first Chief Justice.
You've done some great things in this State, but you've
done them in so far as you've identified with Australia
as a whole. I've never believed that Queenslanders were
different from the rest of Australia; where you're good
it's because you're Australians too.
And perhaps I might be forgiven if I made one
particular illustration of what I mean there, because
the week before last the arrangements had been made here
in Brisbane, in the Administrative Offices -the Premier
was there, and a few other Premiers, and I myself and
somebody on behalf of the Opposition in the Federal
Parliament -we were all there and we agreed that we would
meet in Melbourne the week before last, you know last
week; Wednesday, Thursday, Friday last week, Clem Jones,
the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition all of us were
to be down there. This was all arranged in June; it was
to be a Constitutional Convention and suddenly, right at
the end, it was decided up here that you wouldn't go,
and the reason was because at the Constitutional Convention
we were going to talk about local government, It was
on the agenda, arnd it was on the agenda because when the
Convention was first suggested back in 1972, there was a
House of Representatives election imminent and we said
that we would have a Convention but only on condition
that local government was represented at it as well.
Because these days it would be absurd to look at the
Constitutional arrangements in Australia and think that
they were matters solely for the Federal Government and the
State Governments. There are many things that the local
government bodies in Australia need to do; if they don't
do them, or if they can't do them well enough, then our
com. munity suffers. So we insisted that local government be
on the agenda, that was decided at the Sydney Convention, of course,
two years ago and it was again to be on the agenda for
Melbourne last week. And because it was there , the Liberal
Premiers and the Country Party Premier wouldn't go; they
didn't want to be seen to vote against the interests of
local government. But my Government believes that it is
important that that sphere of government also be mentioned
in the Constitution and that local government be given the
wherewithall, be given the opportunity, to do the things
that need to be done on a regional, or local or community basis.
Well~ that's why they didn't turn up, at the Convention.
But they were all gathered, the absentees, on the other
side of the road; -they were all in-Melbourne. They gathered
on the other side of the road and they issued a statement
on federalism. The significance is that it was a statement
on taxation and you in Queensland will realise the implications
of that statement because the core of it is to abandon uniform
taxation and to say that everywhere in Australia you will pay
two lots of tax one lot of income tax to the Federal 
Government, and the other lot of income tax Ito the
State Government. ( Inter-jection: " Fraser's folly")
Well, I appreciate the phraseology I said that
everywhere in Australia you'd pay two lots of taxthat's
rnotright, in Canberra they'll only pay one lot,
they'll only be paying the Federal'tax, and they'll get
out of the other tax entirely, and the reason for that
is that the Federal Parliament can only impose taxes on
condition that those taxes are equal throughout Australia.
That is. the Federal Parliament couldn't pass a special
tax for" Canberra to bring it up to what any of the
other States were paying. So if you have two lots of
income tax, the Federal one and the State one,-the
people in Canberra will be overjoyed. When I retire
I'll go to live there along, the road, admittedly, but
it'd be a good place to retire, because I wouldn't have to
pay that second tax. But I don't think the people will cop
it because Queenslanders still will recall in many cases,
and those Who don't remember it will easily find it out,
and read about it, that in the days in Australia, that is
until 1942, when there was Federal income tax, and also in
every State a State income tax the taxes in Queensland
were higher than in any other part~ of Australia, and it
was because of that that so many people invested, and
employed and went to live in the southern States. And
Queensland's industries have never caught up because of
that tax. Queensland being an extensive State, a State
which has to have schools, and hospitals and other public
services throughout this very large area, the second
largest State in Australia -but only a third in populationthey
had to pay more to get Government services for people
anywhere where they lived in the State. By contrast
in Victoria, a compact State, the smallest of the mainland
States, the second largest in population of the
Australian States, their tax was lowest, because you don't
have to spread Government services over such a large area.
There are many more people able to use every centre of
Government service. So in those days, two taxes: Queenslanders
paid the highest tax in Australia, and they had to do that,
and even then couldn't get,... one must admit,-as good schools,
for instance, as were provided in the other States. Now
that is the core of this policy of federalism, bringing a
double tax system, instead of a uniform tax system, and the
comparison is made with Canada. Now I'm damn glad the
comparison has been made, because it's very easy for people
to see what the population of the Canadian provinces is, and
what the tax rates in the Canadian provinces is. And
the most populous, the most prosperous provinces in Canada.
Ontario, British Colombia,... they pay, they charge the lowest
provincial income tax; and the smallest, in population, or
the-largest in area, the poorest of the States, you know to
put it bluntlyof the provinces there, they pay the highest
taxes. Now this is just the wrong way you'd want to have it.
It ought to be possible for us as one nation to see that
whatever a person does, wherever he lives, governments
provide the things which governments have to provide of
equal standard. If you go to a new place you shouldn't"
have to wait until your family has grown up or has left
the district before standards in that district become good enough. 
If you live in a run-down area you shouldn't have to
bear, unaided, the replenishment or the improvment, the
replacement of the standards for the things which
gJovernments -have to provide. It's important that as one
nation we should see that wherever Australians live they
are able to get as good schools, as good hospitals, or
as good public services as Australians get anywhere else.
' The only way to do that is to pool the resources of the
nation and have themi spent where they are needed * most.
Now, it's true enough, people say, say about the United
States; there are State income taxes there; but you
look at the United States. It's very eVenly developed.
There are as many people on the Wiest coast in California
as on the East coast in New York. There are as many
people up in the north, say in Illinois, as there are
down in the sou * th, such as in Texas. It's equally
taxable, it's equally prosperous. There are patches
which are much less prosperous but north and south, east
and west, the place is very even. But you look in
Australia, it's in the south-eastern part, the part say,
Melbourne and Sydney, or if you like to stretch it,
from Adelaide to Brisbane and the part down below that
lineuduch is the prosperous part. The rest of Queensland
or South Australia, or Western Australia or New South
Wales is very much more expensive to run. Now the core
of what the Liberals are putting to the people now should be
seen~ by the people. And I don't believe they'll have a
bar of it. I've always said~ when there was an election,
or when one was in the offing, and the Liberals had to be
precise, people would' see the catches. It's no use just
abusing us because of unemployment, or inflation. Sure
the-v'Ie bad; but there'Is no country in Europe or North
Ainerica where they,, aren't just as bad. They're much worse
than when we came in, but they're much worse in all those
other countries than they were three years ago you can't
bl-e us alone; you don't blame Nixon for that alone;.
or Ford or Wilson or Schmidt or Pompidou or Giscard d'Estaingor
Franco. It happens everywhere in the West, everywhere.
And of course our opponents may parry by saying well we did
it; things are crook, and every political party in opposition
says it about the government in every country in the west,
one has to admit that. If we were in opposition I think
we'd be ' itaking out a very. good claim against the government.
When you have to face the people there has to be an
alternative put, and there can be no doubt that when they
start in our O? position to specify-what they would do if they
were given the chance you'll see the catch. And I don't
believe that anybody in Queensland would want to go back to
the stage of double ta * xation, because it's only the Liberal
Party in Sydney and Melbourne that has sold this policy
to the Federal leaders. You'll notice, Gordon Chalk, he's
very unenthusiastic about it; so's Kevin Cairns -the first
time I've ever mentioned him on a platform. But
I don't propose to tal= k anything about platforms or policies.
It's once they sta-rt being precise, you can see the catch.
Then they were talkin-g about tax indexation a month ago.
Hocw would you have ax indexation on State income taxes as well 
as Federal income taxes; what could the Federal people
do about tax indexation on the State income tax?
Now some people say that there will be in a few weeks,
a couple of months, an election. All I can say to you is
that before the end of June next year there will be
an election, at least, for half the Senate, there must
be. Now the Senators who are there and were elected
to go up to the end of next June, they will . be there until
the end of next June; whenever there is an election for
half the Senate the new Senators to replace them would not
take office until the 1 July. But the interesting thing
is that at the moment it is a flawed Senate, or as Jim Killen says,
a tainted Senate. There are two people there; I don't
know who owns them, but they don t belong to us. But
they succeeded people who the people elected as members
of the Labor Party. And let's remember, back at the last
elections in May last year, not only was there a very
large majority of voters for the Labor Party in the House
of Representatives we've a comfortable majority there,
but the Labor candidates for the Senate got more votes
than did the candidates of the Liberal Party, the
Country Party, the Liberal Movement, the-D. L. P. remember
the all of them combined, every party combined,
got fewer votes than we got in the Senate. But we haven't
got a majority of members in it, and to get things through
the Senate you have to get a majority. If the Senate
is evenly divided the thing doesn't go through. Now in
those circumstances, of course, it would be absurd for a
Senate not to pass legislation we put up. Now some people
say that the Senate will reject the Budget. Well if that
took place) it would be very interesting to fight a
campaign on what sort of Budget they would put instead.
It's not the Senate's job to reject Budgets; they can't
initiate money bills, the Constitution says so; they
Scan't amend money bills, the Constitution says so.
The Victorian Constitution says that the Upper House can
reject money bills, the Australian Constitution doesn't
use that word at all, so some of the comparisons made down
there have no validity in our situation. Now, I musn't
K speculate any further, because I don't,. you know, I want
to catch people with their pants down. It's an attitude
which appeals to people that boarded at the best schools.
If there was an election on the grounds that the Senate had
rejected the Budget. then the election would turn around what
sort of Budget woil; the Senate have passed? What sort of
Budget would the Liberals want? And that would be very
intriguing to find out. Because I don't believe that it is
possible in the circum. stances applying in Australia or in
comparable countries today to bring down a better Budget
than Queensland's Bill Hayden introduced. If I may draw
a comparison, he's a person very much like Denis Murphy; a
person who, without any inherited advantages, has qualified
himself superbly for an important role in this community,
and instead of just looking after his own selfish interests,
looks after the community and serves it with might and main. 



1 7 4 OVER THE YEARS, THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY HAS NOT ENJOYED
A VERY GOOD PRESS. By CONTRAST, WE HAVE BEEN GENERALLY
WELL-TREATED BY HISTORY AND THE HISTORIANS, IT IS
SOME CONSOLATION TO KNOW THAT HISTORY WILL RENDER A
FAVOURABLE VERDICT. THE DIFFICULTY IS TO WAIT AROUND
LONG ENOUGH FOR THE JUDGEMENT TO BE HANDED DOWN.
IF POSTERITY HAD THE V/ OTE, LABOR WOULD NEVER BE OUT
OF OFFICE. As IT IS WE HAVE THE PARADOX THAT WHILE
AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL HISTORY TENDS VERY LARGELY TO BE
WRITTEN IN TERMS OF THE HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR
PARTY, THE PARTY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL HAS HELD OFFICE
ONLY 18 YEARS OF THE 714 YEARS OF FEDERATION.
THE ARRIVAL OF DENIS IURPHY'S BOOK ' LIFE OF T. J. RYAN'
FIFTY-FIVE YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH, DOES POINT TO THE
RATHER LEISURELY PACE AT WHICH OUR ACADEMIC HISTORIANS
PRODUCE THEIR ASSESSM~ ENTS. THE GAPS ARE ENORMOUS.
THERE IS STILL NO DEFINITIVE WORK ON PARKES, GRIFFITH,
BARTON, FISHER, LYONS, AND ABOVE ALL, CURTIN.
THE LAST WORD HAS NOT BEEN SAID ABOUT HUGHES, BRUCE,
OR CHIFLEY, As FAR AS I AM AWARE, NO-ONE HAS YET
UNDERTAKEN THE FORMIDABLE TASK OF ASSESSING THE MENZIES ERA.
THE JOURNALISTS HAVE BEEN MUCH MORE PROMPTO
IN MORE THAN ONE SENSE, ALAN REID DID GORTONAND
I SHOULD GIVE A PLUG FOR LAURIE OAKES' BOOK ON WHITLAM
WHICH INEXPLICABLY HAS BEEN REMAINDERED AT 35 CENTS,
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT BOOK LAUNCHING OF
T. J. RYAN A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY
BY
DENIS MURPHY.
AT BRISBANE, 3 OCTOBER 1975 
-2-
THERE IS OF COURSE A POIGNANCY ABOUT THE STORY OF
T. J. RYAN. HE DIED AT FORTY-FIVE IN THE PRIME OF LIFE,
AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS POWERS, WITH EVERY PROSPECT OF EVEN
GREATER ACHIEVEMENTS AHEAD OF HIM. THERE WAS EVERY REASON
TO BELIEVE THAT HE WOULD SHORTLY BECOME THE LEADER OF THE
FEDERAL PARLIAMENTARY LABOR PARTY AND PRIME MINISTER.
DEATH WROTE A GREAT QUESTION MARK ON HIS CAREER.
T. J. RYAN WAS SUPERBLY EQUIPPED BY TEMPERAMENT AND
TRAINING FOR THE ROLE HE PLAYED AND FOR THE LARGER ROLE
TO WHICH HE ASPIRED. THE STATUE IN THE EXECUTIVE GARDENS
REPRESENTS HIM AS A KING'S COUNSEL.' HE WAS . IN FACT
THE ONLY LAWYER TO HEAD THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT THIS
CENTURY. THERE IS A DOUBLE FIRST THERE THE ONLY
LAWYER PREMIER AND THE ONLY QUEENSLAND PREMIER OF THIS
CENTURY TO HAVE A STATUE SO FAR. IN FACT JACK PIZZEY
ALSO VERY TRAGICALLY CUT OFF AT THE HEIGHT OF HIS CAREER
IS THE ONLY OTHER QUEENSLAND PREMIER THIS CENTURY TO
HAVE OBTAINED A DEGREE. RYAN'S LEGAL TRAINING WAS
OBVIOUSLY OF VERY GREAT IMPORTANCE TO HIM IN THE TWO
GREAT CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL BATTLES OF HIS CAREERAGAINST
THE PRETENSIONS OF THE UPPER HOUSE, THE HAPPILY
DEFUNCT LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, AND AGAINST HUGHES. 
-3-
THE HEART OF DENIS MURPHY'S BOOK IS THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN
RYAN AND HUGHES OVER CONSCRIPTION. THERE IS TRAGEDY,
COMEDY, REAL DRAMA AND MERE MELODRAMA. FORTUNATELY
IN THESE DAYS OF REASON AND LIGHT, AUSTRALIAN PRIME MINISTERS
AND -QUEENSLAND PREMIERS ARE ABLE TO BASE THEIR RELATIONS
ON A SPIRIT OF CO-OPERATION AND MUTUAL RESPECT.
RYAN TRANSFERRED TO FEDERAL POLITICS FOR THE SPECIFIC
PURPOSE OF DEFEATING HUGHES IN THE NATIONAL ARENA.
IN THE EVENT, IT WAS NOT RYAN WHO DID FOR HUGHES*
HE WAS DESTROYED BY HIS OWN COLLEAGUES, THUS ESTABLISHING
THE GREAT CONSERVATIVE TRADITION, OF WHICH IN THEIR TURN
LATHAM, MENZIES, GORTON AND SNEDDEN WERE ALL VICTIMS,
WITH LYONS AND HOLT SAVED FROM A SIMILAR FATE BY DEATH.
THERE IS ONE ASPECT OF RYAN'S CONDUCT IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
CONSCRIPTION WHICH MERITS MENTION. THE DEFECTION OF
HUGHES AND EVERY STATE LABOR LEADER EXCEPT RYAN DEALT A
VERY HEAVY BLOW TO THE CONFIDENCE OF THE PARTY NOT ONLY
IN THEIR LEADERS BUT IN THE VERY PRINCIPLE OF LEADERSHIP
ITSELF. THE PARLIAMENTARY WING AND PARLIAMENTARY LEADERSHIP
BECAME HEAVILY SUSPECT. THERE WAS A STRONG ATTEMPT TO
TAKE THE ELECTION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY LEADERSHIP AWAY FROM
THE PARLIAMENTARIANS AND PLACE IT IN THE HANDS OF THE MACHINE.
THIS DID IN FACT SUCCEED IN NEW SOUTH WALES, AND LANG OWED
HIS POSITION TO THE CENTRAL EXECUTIVE, NOT THE NEW SOUTH
WALES CAUCUS. 
THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT RYAN BY HIS STATURE AND HIS
FIRM LOYALTY TO THE PRINCIPLE OF PARLIAMENTARY INDEPENDENCE
MADE THE MAJOR CONTRIBUTION IN PREVENTING THIS OCCURRING
AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL. THE PARTY'S CONFIDENCE IN
ITS LEADERSHIP WAS NOT REALLY RESTORED UNTIL CURTIN
BUT RYAN MORE THAN ANYONE ELSE PRESERVED THE PRINCIPLE
INTACT. SO CURTIN AND ALL HIS SUCCESSORS OWE THIS
DEBT To RYAN.
DENIS MURPHY'S BOOK DOCUMENTS A NOTABLE FEATURE OF
AUSTRALIAN POLITICAL LIFE THE AMAZING CONSISTENCY.'
THE STERILITY, THE SHEER LACK OF IMAGINATION IN THE
INVECTIVE USED AGAINST THE LABOR PARTY. HERE ARE
SOME DESCRIPTIONS OF RYAN AND HIS GOVERNMENT:
i 8TYRANNY. TREACHERY TREASON
MOB RULE COMMUNIST BOLSHEVIK
DISLOYAL TO THE CROWN A CONTEMPTIBLE CONSPIRACY
REPREHENSIBLE... . A THREAT TO THE AUSTRALIAN WAY
OF LIFE...," 1
AND OF COURSE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
OFFICE WAS VIOLENT REVOLUTIONARY SOCIALIST ATTEMPT
TO DESTROY FREEDOM OF ENTERPRISE AND THE RIGHTS OF FREE
CHOICE.." IT IS ALL SO DEPRESSINGLY FAMILIAR. 
BEFORE RYAN'S LEADERSHIP THE PARTY'S STRENGTH IN
QUEENSLAND WAS BASED IN THE OUTBACK AND THE CENTRAL
AND NORTHERN PROVINCIAL TOWNS, HIS POLITICAL
ACHIEVEMENT WAS TO FORGE A NEW BASE IN BRISBANE.
THE ALLIANCE BETWEEN THE CAPITAL AND THE GREAT
PROVINCIAL CITIES LAID THE FOUNDATIONS FOR LABOR'S
ASCENDANCY IN QUEENSLAND WHICH LASTED ALMOST UNBROKEN
FOR NEARLY HALF A CENTURY, TO RESTORE THAT
ALLIANCE IS STILL THE KEY TO POLITICAL SUCCESS FOR
THE PARTY IN QUEENSLAND,
I CONGRATULATE DENIS ON HIS PAINSTAKING WORK, HIS
PATIENT RESEARCH, HIS VERY READABLE RE-CREATION OF
A TURBULENT BUT VERY FRUITFUL PERIOD IN THE POLITICAL
LIFE OF QUEENSLAND AND OF AUSTRALIA, IN THIS RECORD
OF A GREAT CAREER UNTIMELY CUT OFF, HE HAS MADE A
MAJOR CONTRIBUTION TO OUR HISTORY, OUR POLITICS
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THAT HISTORY AND THOSE POLITICS,
,11a I I, 



PPIPME MNISTER S SPEEQ-1 AT TE= J-7UJNCHTNG OF DITIS MURPHY' S IXK } WYM
BRLSBAZE, 3 OZI'-OBER 1975
1Mr Deputy Vice-Chancellor, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a very great pleasure indeed to be launching another
book written by one of Australia's finest historians, a
distinguished member of thle staff of the University of
Queensland; a book printed, published by the University
of Queensland ? ress; and to launch this book, to support
the author in the house occupied by three Premiers of
Queensland. The last of those Preiers to occupy it"
being the subject of the book T. J. Ryan himself.
The Labor Party has not always had a good press but it's
always had good historians. And whatever may be said about
writers at any particular time, about the Labor Party they
always look at Australian history,-not just Australian
politics in retrospect, but Australian history in terms
of what has been achieved by the Labor party the leaders
and the members of the Labor party. And so it is with
T. J. Ryan. The fact that this book has appeared 55 years
after his death illustrates one important thing, I think,
about our history, about our biographies, and that is
that it takes a very long time in Australia to enable,
or encourage historians to write about great Australians.
Certainly T. J. Ryan deserved a biography, but there are so
many people who've been prominent in Australian politics,
in Australian histor-y, about whom no significant biographical
material has yet appeared. There is no definitive work
on Parkes, or on Griffith-a very great Queenslander-or
on Barton, or on Fisher, or on Lyons or above all on Curtin.
And there must still be much to be published about Hughes
and Bruce and Chifley. And as far as I know, noone has yet
undertaken the formidable task of assessing the Menzies
era. The journalists have been much more prompt. Alan Reid
did John Gorton in every sense. And there is another
journalist, distinguished journalist, a very perceptive
journalist, Laurie Oakes, who did a book on me and it's
now available as a remainder at 35 cents a copy.
Now at least we have a book on Ryan, a book which
has been all the better because one has been able to mull
over the history, to ponder on it, with maturity. One
inevitably wonders how far Ryan would have gone, how great
would have been his impact in the whole of Australia if he
had been spared longer. There's no question the impact he
had on Queensland in his time, and for succeeding decades.
He was only 45 when he died. He was at the height of his
power. There was every prospect that he would. have become
Prime Minister. He was superbly equipped by tarerarPnt. and
training for the role he played in. Queensland, and for the
wider, and greater role to which he aspired. The statue
in the Executive Gardens in Brisbane represents him as a
King's Councellor. He was in fact the only lawyer to head
a Queensland Government this century. That's a double
first, because he was also not only the only lawyer to-head
a Queensland Government this century, he was only one of the
two people who've been through a university and headed a
Queensland Government Jack Pizzey being the other, another
man who was taken far too early from the scene. 
2.
Now, Ryan's legal training was obviously of
very great importance to him in the two great constitutional
and legal battles of his career. Queensland Premiers have
sometimes been legal but they'Ive not always been
constitutional. He had two great constitutional fights
one was against the Upper House I'm amazed the interest
Queensland parliamentarians take in Upper Houses now they
no longer have one themselves they don't really have a
very good sense of who should be imembers of Upper Houses
even then. The other great fight he had, cons titutionally,
was against Hughes. Now the heart of Dr Denis M'urphy's
biography of Ryan is the fight between Ryan and Hughes
over conscription. there's tragedy, comedy, real drama
and mere melodrama in that story which Dr Murphy has
interpreted and perpetuated. Fortunately in these days of
reason and light it is possible for a Prime Minister of
Australia and a Premier of Queensland to conduct any
arguments they have in a very tolerant way cooperation
and imutual respect as we know. But not in the days of
Hughes and Ryan. Ryan transferred to the Federal arena
for the specifLic purpose of getting rid of Hughes.
He needn't have worried because at that time Hughes
had joined the conservative forces and they always get
rid of their leaders themselves. Ryan was barely in the
Federal Parliament and the conservatives, the Tories of
that day, dumped Hughes. And of course, before ten years
was up they dumped Latham, and another ten years they
diumed Menzies. Then it took a bit longer before they
dumped Gorton, and then it accelerated again and they
dumped Snedden now that's a very sad procession why
Tories can't be loyal to their leaders.
Now there's one aspect of Ryan's conduct in the
fight against conscription which merits mention. The
defection of Hughes and of every State leader of the Labor
Party throughout Australia in the conscription era, except
Ryan himself, meant that the Labor party for a lon-g time
was suspicious of parliamentarians and suspicious of
parliamentary leaders. Ryan was the only parliamentary
leader of the Labor party in Australia who stood staunch
during the conscription time. And as Dr Denis Murphy's
book has pointed out, Ryan insisted on a proper role being
accorded by the party to those candidates whom the party
chose and whom the public elected to parliament. No
party enjoys public support unless the party respects its
parliamentarians. Now Ryan preserved the position of the
parliamentary party in Queensland in that generation, and
he kept alive'the very necessary popular support which
parliamentarians must have. In some other States the step
was taken to see that the people outside the party elected
the parliamentary leader that was the case with Jack
Lang. Jack Lang had support of the party machine long after
he ceased to have the support of the parliamentary party.
Now it was not until Curtin's day that the parliamentary
party and the parliamentary leadership was seen to have the
support of the party all over. ./ 3 
Now one of the things which I enjoyed-in
reading Denis Murphy's book was the consistency of the
uinchanging character of the criticisms which are made of
Vhe Labor Party. Looking through some of the things I
thought t. Hfis is an amazing conte-mporary work because
Ryan's c-overnent was described as showing tyranny,
treachery, treason, mob-rule; it was communist, it was
bolshevik, it was disloyal to the Crown, it-was a
contemptible conspiracy, it was reprehensible and
represented a threat to the Australian way of life.
Now all those things were said about Ryan when he was
Premier of Queensland, when he was leader of the
Australian Labor Party in Queensland. And one particular
thing that the Ryan Government established was a
Government Ir-surance office, a State Government insurance
office and this was described as a violent, revolutionary,
socialist attempt to destroy freedom of enterprise and
the right to free choice. It's all so depressingly
familiar. That is when it's done, first, it is completely
reprehensible, it's intolerable, it. has to be condemned
and resisted and if possible rejected. But once it comes
about we see how beneficial it was. Looking back at
T. J. Ryan's life, we can see how much he did achieve in
the face of' all this irrational criticism.
Now before Ryan's leadership~ the Australian
Labor Party ' s strength in Queensland was based in the
outback and in the provincial cities. lie realised that
the core of success in Queensland politics was . to
link the interests orE the capital and the provincial cities.
And after Ryanfor decades &gt; the LaborParty -in Queensland
held office-wi-* th only a single gap of-three years-because
it retained the support of the provincial cities and the
capital. And to restore that alliance is still the key
to political success for the Australian Labor Party in
Queensland. T. J. Ryan showed it, his associates and his
successors preserved it for, a decade. If wie're to be true
to the things he established-the ideas, the institutionswe
must again bring about that alliance.
I congratulate Dr Murphy, whom I've known for
very many years, as a candidate, as an historian, as an
academic. I congratulate him on his painstaking work, his
patient research, his very readable recreation of a
turbulent, but very fruitful period in the political life
of Queensland and Australia. He records a period in
Australian history where Queensland led Australia. The
ideas that those first Labor Governments in Queensland
put on the statute books, the administrative acts they
achieved led Australia. In this record of a great career,
untimely cut short, Denis Murphy has made a major
contribution to our history and our politics; our understanding
of that history and of those politics. I'm certain that
not only will academics, not only will historians, but the
people of Queenslaznd' and the people of Australia understand
so very much better what made this great man and what in
his time, under his leadership, gave Queensland the pioneering,
the leading role in this country. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIM11E M INISTER, AT THE PARLIM ENTARY LUNCHEON
FOR THE PRIM E MINISTER OFM14ALAYSIA, 16 OCTOBER 1975
On each of my nine visits to your capital
since 1962 as Deputy Leader of the Opposition, as Leader
of the Opposition, as Prime Minis ter of: Australia, you have
always received me and I have been able to draw on your
wisdom and experience. I have valued that highly and
equally value the warmth of your friendship. It may be
that in Australia we cannot welcome you with that natural
grace, the instinctive elegance, the unaffected charm which
is the characteristic of the Malaysian people. But there
is nothing lacking in our warmth of feeling in our welcome
to you and Toh Puan Rahah and our warmth and goodwill
towards your people and your nation.
My pleasure in welcoming you here on your first
Prime Ministerial visit derives in considerable part from
the honour I find in being host to a leader who must rank
as South East Asia's longest serving and most dedicated
and industrious servant of his people. For 20 years from
the beginning of national independence, you have served as
a Minister. Under your guidance the last five years have
been years of marked growth and development within Malaysia.
I recall my previous visits to your country
not only because -of the pleasure the memory holds for me
but as a measure of the remarkable and beneficial changes
which have occurred in our region in that period. in
1962 ASEAN could not have existed, could hardly have been
contemplated. Confrontation has given way to regional
cooperation which as made ASEAN one of the world's most
truly effective regional associations. All the nations
of our region except our commuon great reighbour Indonesia
refused with varying degrees of hostility and ignorance,
to recognise the reality of China. A thirty-year civil war
in Indo-China was in a temporary lull before its bloodiest
and most catastrophic renewal. The concept of a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality for the region would have
been dismissed as dangerous nonsense as indeed it still
is in certain quarters.
As Prime Minister, Tun, you have been very much
in the vanguard of those who have had the foresight to
take positive steps in the developments which have ended
old hostilities and the old sterilities. You led the way
in recognising the reality of China and others have followed
this lead. And now with the end of the Vietnamese and
Cambodian wars your Government is actively working for
harmony amkongst all the nations of South East Asia. I
cannot but agree that the end of the war in Indo-China
provides the region with its first real opportunity to
achieve peace, progress and stability. You are to be
commended for making cooperation and conciliation the
basis of your relations with the new Indo China G overnments. ./ 2 
2.
You realistically ackanxledge , I know, that the
process of reconciliation will not be without its
frustrations. But you will persevere. In the end
trust and goodwill will be rewarded with the development
of lasting links and mutual respect. You have
urged ZOPPAN. Our region must not be the area of
confrontation and competition between the Great Powers.
It is gratifying to reflect upon our
exchanges in Kuala Lumpur in January 1974, when the
0 war in Indo China still raged, and note that many
of the hopes we held then for the future of the region
have come to be fulfilled.
The relationship between our two countries
today is deepening and widening. Trade, investment,
development assistance, defence cooperation, participation
in common regional organisations and in particular,
the Commonwealth of Nations, and student exchange, and
tourism, make our relationship meaningful, fruitful,
living. We share common inheritance of institutions,
Q particularly those relating to parliamentary democracy
and the rule of law.
Q We share the Federal system and a
bicameral system, we share to a varying degree the experience
of the difficulties of both. You, Prime'Minister,
may even have experienced the passing pangs which come
from the pretensions of provincial satraps.
There may even be occasional murmurs against the cerntralists
in Kuala Lumpur as there are against your counterparts
in Canberra. Democracy, particularly in a federal system,
is extraordinarily complex and extraordinarily fragile.
Around the world it is going through its most challenging
time. It is under challenge in nations with a
relatively brief tradition of Parliamentary democracy,
and in those with a long tradition. We are two of the 
3.
handful of Parliamentary democracies left in our*
region. There are those in both our countries, who
in their different ways, are challenging the system,
challenging the tradition. The Aalaysian national
Parliament is only twenty years old. It would be
natural that such a nation would look to nations
with a more mature Parliamentary system, an older
tradition, well-entrenched democracy conventions,
as an example nations like Australia, Parliaments
like the Australian Parliament. It would be
appalling if we were unable to get t-hat example.
You, Mr Prime M1iniser, have battled valiantly in your
country to uphold the essence of democracy. You
have done your part. May I say in this Parliamentary
gathering, as one Parliamentarian-to another, I
intend to play mine. 



P RT lei P J. 1. ITT 1Rf* 3;. 1_ T', ECXi. UI IkY : i'cj; 1, SYDNEY, 24 OC---L I97:
Mr. Chairm,-. an, L E U-i1 and Gecntlemen.
Seventeen months ago th2-people of-his Lity-and this State and this
count.-y had an bloctior i f: r Pec: rl-3. f or the, House of.
Representatives and for-tlj,-: Serial-. r. "' Ind riery large iFJor. Uy of'
the peocpl~ e of this cit%--y and this ~ a~~ and t-h-is country Said that.
they waned, once z. crain, to havec I-k~ -o~ rari. t 1he'
. of Australia. And t-hroucjhout that my o1leag-. ces arnd I,~
on behalf.-of the Labor Par-iw, a. nd th:ñ^ r! u pciople on beha-lf ofC
the Libnral Party and the Country P , rty all saidl that t'Aatlein
was to choose a Govcernmcent for thec fallowing tie years. nve
said that if we didn'lt qct a majorit~ y in thci Hoiuse of Rie. res3ent.&amp;-tives
but were able to broak c., vcn only,. in the Senzite and use t. he enzaQ.(
* to block the Gove rnrlent xvh _ cl had a tajority in the-Houmse of
Representatives, that iqc would bloc% it, Wel were very clear wit))
the public; we didn't Nant once uaprx the -; ituatian to atisc, which
arose in April last year,, w,. here a~, after only sevCen1teen-1v10rthsr
* the Senate threatened to block tho. i] ney ' for thc, Governwnent to cr~
the affairs ofthe Nir'Lion. Everyb. oay kno-w that that had hap--tmea. C
once and during the caii-paigny nobody said thpat it would happeni again
if he didn't get a majority in the louisz of fersttvs. I
never said it and Mr Sneddcn, who wa thne lceadeir of-thc Li. beral
Party at that time, he never said it either. And for those, who
* knew of DNr Fraser, hie never said it dluring the earnpaicrn. Sco the
people were asked, only seventeen mihsago to say, who was to he
the Government of this -country for the next three years.
And the people said that they wanted another three years of a Labor
Government iii Australia. And they gave the Labor Party a crmfortable
* majority in the House of Representativs In thea hundreds of
divisions which have takeni place in the House of. Rep re sentative r
last year and this year the L~ abor Gcva-rrnent: has never been def-!* ete..
And every time we have sought a vote on. anything that we put thejro,
any time we've been challenged to hav-e a voto on something the
O * aLnidb ecroanlsv inancdin gthlye. Countzy Party put up there, we have won it fairly
Now in the Senate, the system is so complicated, we only broke even
in May last year. We got 29 out of 60 Senators. The Liberals and
the Country Party al. so got 29 out of 60 Senators and there were two
independents. Now, in this Sta-te, we'-. ve got an overwhelming majority
for the Senate, and in the whole of the coun~ try,, the Labor candidat. 1es
for the Senate got 165,000 more votcf: than wore given to the
candidates of every other Party in tic. o Senate. All of themi combined. rl
got 165,000 fewer votes than the Labor Canjdirj ~ tes. But the zsystc) eni
* is so complicated and Tasmania, one elIevoenth of N 1ew South Wales'
population, still gets at. many Senators as D~ ew South Wales. We
-only were 50-50 in the Senate. Now., i those-circumstances it waS
reasonable enough that wia should forii the Goverrient. Gover-nmento
always are formed in the House of Y1ew'-sesntatives, and not only
that, only in the House of Represciit-at3. vc-s can a Mon( e-y Bill be
initiated, only i~ n the House of Repro sentat.. vos carn a Money Bill.
be amended. The Senate can not initii at a V~ owey BiJl le &amp; lone. Za
* Budget anC. the Senate co-Lild not a a. aino ne\ ) 3iU~ let alone a
Budget. Now in those circumrstances wnv were thec Govorrinceiit of
Australia. We had the majority in th(-House of ) 7epresentati%, es.
Now the proposition that is being pat to you now by the Liberals I. s, 
the p eople who ve liost out in of ' s e nalive. F. t'ihe
people t~ hat got 165,000 fci' VC~'. n the : 7 1t c-s1h ovTd Stil.) o.
able to ' use th e Sc ate to 1) cck 11c es o Y cntaeii: Liv nru!
the principlie for hich woare fiq~ Linrg is th,: h oueo
Represent~ atives shall continue to It. ie Feclrn. ll House where Covernments
are made and nmd. IIurasecondl time, do vhat I1
in April last year,, that is* at th: 2 miere threat of the refusal, of
the money for the Government to cFa,-: zy on, t h i ask f or a. double
dissolut-ion -and . C coul. d at thi,, rloient i f I do that,.: I
abandon the princieile that the. Pou -c oJ_' Repr eF; ntati-vea is wherre
Governments are nalae or unmade. An(_ i thlat Wil. not onl-y, that will
not only interrupt Governiment. in Ai7 , tralia, frustzate G vrnmcn
in Australia on this occasion: it will interrupt and : ifrustratn
Government-in Autralia whenever th, 2 Serna te chs. oses -to reject or
* delay a Money Bill. even a Budget. And we can't have 1.. hat happen
asecond time. It s not just the fortunes of the prezm Govcrnrjnt
the -Labor Government, my Government, it's not that; it, is the
fortunes of every s~ ubsequont Covexi-:! r. nt in Pastralia whchth
people choose by giving a majority its Party in the House of
Representatives. I am impressed here as I was in Mlelbournp last Monday and, as my
colleagues were last weekend in every other capital in Australia
by the immense ntunher, the thousandr.-of people who ' ye attencled these
protest rallies, who, were, born in oth; r countries. Because people
from other countries know how,. fragile democracy -is: how much, how
often, how ruthlessly the corneraLv recinr1 ore1ilkl
democracy when they th-ink they can cuet away with it. And one of the
things that enthused and elated and up].. fted thia migqrants in Austrai
was that in December 1972 they saw that in Australia after the hard
fought campaign, at a secret-ballot, it was possible to change thi_
Government. And they expfected that Government to have at least
3 years, not just from December ' 72 to April they expected it
to have 3 years. And when they made! their great, their immense
contribution to reelecting that Government in May last year, they
expected it to have 3 years and not just seventeen months. And we
-don't want the system in Australia that has bedevilled and weakened
democracy in so many countries f rom which migrants-have come, whcre
Governments change too f requently, where no government has the.
opportunity to carry-out its program. In Australia we elect
Governments, it's always been thought, for three years an t h
end of three years there is a ballot, a secret ballot-, a-free
W campaign and you can then decide whcet*;-her you want to have the
Government for another three years or whether you want another Party
to be the Government also for three years.
And what is at stake now is not whether you will have House of
Represent ative s elections every one and a hal~ f years, which is what
the Liberals are now saying, but whether you. could have House of
* Representatives elections every six rmonths. Bec-use twics every
year the House of Repre sent at ive s paFsses Buqttide Bills, Supply
Bills. Every year in October the House of Representatives passes
Bills which will carry out the whole of the -financial arrangerilents
of Australia from July to June!, the whole twelve months. And thenin
April every year the House of Rep -PsentatZ'ves passes other ' Bill.: s
as to how much money yuwlhae how you w'ill spen t3he iiin. n! y
from July to Noveraber followuing; twi. ce a year, in Oct-ol) Ar and in
April the House of Representatives initiates Money Bills, the Budc. t 
3.
andSu~ pl an ter~~' ey oto the Sr. rt te. PAiW or th: 75 year-,
that woe'Ive.. had-a * N~. onal P ciit~' iI in. iistc-:. a. thie S, E. t
always par-sed tho . e " Aills, it ha~ s Y) rir O] vo5those( 13511s, or
. rustrate.~ -hose Rills. Au -trrcliar, Jrr three quarters of
acentury has operatcd. on thvz baisis tiiia twieca uenya h.
Representatives brings up, th. s colleoAic'n. of ~ ci-i~ zand. tho
Senate pal-se them.
But the Liberals are now saying th~ o. oevy eofhz cain,
every October, every Apriltt'h y can. rc~ Jezt theo M. cney 13i. 11 zsand tlie..
L ut I want to assure you because mcof. i. of yo11 ( OdOnl woeekly or
fortnightly incomes paid by/ employers-many ol: yo~ ur ei yers are
Government or Government Department: 3 risv etlto I a: sure
you that we have the money passed t April t: o pay every salar,',
every wage bill, not only this week Lnr ~ i Cor-Liight'Is time and.
in four weeks time. The monoy is thc:: e to stec te, evrhodywh
depends on. the Australian Governient for his inecorne, for her incoinc,
will receive that on the dot unti~ l the enid 01: Novcmber.* And we
are confident that if by the end of N'ovcmber lbc Senatc'] Es s till.
refused to debate the Budget:, or has ril ref-Lru:: d to pails the
Budgetrother arrariqements can be made to enable(-people to stick at
their jobs, to do their duty, to ser-vef the pc'oupJ. e of Austra] ia;
other arrangements will be mcade. We f-; hall not let the mecn and Vioimea
of Australia who depend on the Australian Goveritent for payment for
their services or ' thoir supplies, we :, hall not. zJlow theiri to be l'etdown.
But mEantime we are determined th,-* t the Australian Governmenrt
wil-govern for the three years for which you elected us. We will.
I'd ask you to note -that the Senalte has not rejected the Budget,
it's only deferred-t it's delayed it, stalled it. Dccause even
the most cussed and unprincipled and greedy * Liberals realise t-hat
this would be a step that * has never beecn taken in A7 str. to eea
Federal Budget. It's never been done and they hesitate to do it.
In the House of Representatives, it's, true, they ' ye twice vote(' aqainrr. t
all the Budget Bills, they did so a imntli agoo theny did so this weekj..
But when the Bills go to the Senate thecy hesitate; they don't vote
against them, they Just move an arnendv,., cnt_ to de1fe--r them. Now I would
-point out that they would rnot be able to carry these amenrdrients to
defer the Budget had not a* Labor Senat11or, SenetI-or Milliner from
Queensland, di~ d f our moriths ago. Anil M BjeJ) kc--Petersen appoirited
a non-Labor Senator to take the place of~ Labor' s Senator Milliner.
WNow if the Labor Senattor Milliner waz: still alii. ve he would be voting
in the Senate with his Labor-colleagjuc~ s as he had done in every day
of his life. And this amendment to d c'ay the Budget would not have.
been passed. The Senate would have bcen evenily oivided. And in
the Senate, if there's as many peoplc voting aqainst a proposition
as for a proposition if the numb,-r: are eqi-al, then the proposition
is lost. And that's the basis of Sen;: te demtocracy. That is, thse
House of Representatives should have 1iJ0ujoity the Sc. nate c,-In
evenly divided but. yet the Senate pre-vail because you need
a majority of votes to get somethint'-ibhrough the. Senate. Now if
Senator Milliner were still alive he N,. ou3 d bc vot ing against the
amtendment which the Liberals have mnv( d to ftfer the Budcfet; to Oelay
the budget; to stall the budget; thlmro would be as nan-y pCeo:,-. le
voting against the amndcid motion Fa: fo~ r it , c it wou'id be lost. 
4i.
And in tliose c trcurfr'stance s IChc fTb era~ wotiA_(. h-ave ir. 1KC rm V).
mind s whe ther to vcote f or i-i ozr not-. tow i-tghtj : 9ri hl. h
S ome dissaltisfaction with the fluCgheL_. somec ' 1 cmer even:
the Budg3ts failcd. I don't -c Io thy . m ' Ytht ;-nte
haven't passed it. So, of Thi r~ urec: erf htoc
Budget is passed people w ill b( n~ r to hciinEit fro-m itc, o s
when this Budget is passed, 3Tiiillio,, taxpayr-n3 in Au! 7tral. ia wiil. l -e
paying taxes at. a lowe-. r ratc. Anc) when tb 3 udcet. E. p~ as e d,
half a million people who've been) p'y tnq tax wily. no luc~ n-gr
have to pay income rtax. An( C ug~ ~ r~ s~ a1 Fhnti hs
. rorts , those concessions fr',* i -which thea wea* 1; ilr used to be-nefi.: wiill
be replaced by reba'.-e which are of eqjual valu e to everybody. AInd
the Liberals are torrified of the p~ opular r&amp; pnewhich the preople
-will show this 1judget when it p.'. SSeO.
Now you sometimes hear, ' Well what about a ( o( ublce dissointiorn?
may well be that in due cours'e there .% ill a double 6jssoliutin.
But not yet. And I'll tell you why you can' have a dovile di: s '. utio
on the Budget. For one thing, if yoi) Nwere to hve a do-obl. e dsotion,
this is what has to happen. The Sei) te has eJeoc t i. illadte
3 months later the Bill has to be passed acg-. in by the P. Ouse of:
Representatives, pas; sed a second tieby the House of Represent6. t: ves
and rejected a second time by the Senate. So if we were to haveLv an
election, a double dissolution, on the Budgctryou Couledi't haCve. f. t:
for at least 4 months arid th1 Senate would have t eette] hqt
' not just * delay it, reject it; thenz 3 months later we'd have to de:. batza
it again. The whole of that process would talKe abouL 4 nonthsq. thl-at
is, if the Senators next Tuesday, were to rejnct the Budcjet, We couldn't
introduce it again in the House of Representati~ ves for another 3
months and then in about a fortnight we-might b able to have the
vote in the Senate on the second occasion. An6i if it were rejcctod
a second tine you could have a double dissolution on the Budg~ et You
couldn't have it for 5 or 6 weeks a'fter it was rejected and then
the last double disFolution, the one that was hce0d last May, it took
over two months to count; for 3 montho AustraliLa was without a
Parliament, the Parliamn wa isfeo h 0 April last y( ar
and it couldn't me et until the 9 July last year.' For 3 Months less
one day, Australia was without a ParJliainent and the whole of the
Goveznment and Public Servants were tied up for 3 moribhs.-Now
ifyou want a double dissolution, on the Budcet you roul@ n It.. yu
want the Budget now. A double disselution couldIn't be held on the
Budget? the Parliament couldnr't meet-to vote on the Budget. another
time for 5 or 6 months fromn now. You can't wait that long; you
shouldA~ be fobbed off from the benefits of Bil1l Hayden's fltudgot
for another 6 months. You want to get: the bcnef its in amonth~ s time
as you are entitled to have them.
Now there may be a double dissolution before-P by about the end of
next year, if the Senate keeps on the obstructionr it has uptil now.
Because in the 3 years that we've been in Govcr; ment thce Senate has
rejected more bills that it passed in the previous 72 ye2ars.
From 1901 till 1972, the whole of those 72 years, the Senate has not
rejected as many bills as it has already rejected in 1973-4-5. Now
if we hadn't had the double dissolution last Ilay,, it's tyue we
wouldn't have got througlr the Medibank B3ill. You wouldi' t have had.
Medibank and you wouldn't have been ablc to got through the -; Ai. 11s
which provide that everybody' s vote in Aiist-rajia will Le of equal
value. But while the B ills have gon-e tlthrough the SeriateC., on A. occusions
has rejected the proposals ' which will carry out that elinctoral
distribution. Because what is at the heart of the objeciion by tbre 
Liberal., a. ndj thc Co--.-ixtry Par~ ty to my'G~ erf~ t is thn.-. rRy
Gove rmt : Is dL: indt( -, cc that.. Aiwsta . ian-: wherev'er they
live, wh-: tever tha' l -o'.., cver ol~ t thi . rrr ih: xv~
rtheir ] neanzi they wil I. &amp; 1 . bave in equal. And. : in this
State of New Sou-th W~ ales treare eleot-orTLesr so:-ae Federal,
electorates who.-n there are fewrer th--n 50,000 pe): oplte with a vote
and there-are other electorate-. s in Soifth W, 1res whoj-there
are-nearly 90,000 peonle. i-. h a vote, The a-to bc!. iWeer J: c
than 50,000 andc al.. iiiost 90,000; it Ic. very urmev(-n) and we wir nt to ea
thtin ! hustralia.,. TV-in tho United -atsor e-inmot hronc ar
countries, at loc-~ t. the el. rte hav the sne num1 of p eo,.
in themn. They are dead scared -that : Uf we have a half S: neate election,
which we -will before the end of next Junetwc'li, be able to. get a
fair electoral system through the Senate at last.
Now, you've got the remrd of the Sonate in cgeneiral, ino: e bills
defeated in 3 years than in -the provwious 72. Itht the r. resent
issue is the Budget. -And' what's the alternativc? The onrl'Y*
alternative that Mr Fraser has put 13:-to tho JBu( g( et i1s toa bring
in doubl1e taxation. So that there \ Li II be ia Stzl: te systo'n of incoine
taxation on top 9f the Federal system. We abandoned. tht back Jn
1942; w. e don't want that unncqua1 sys. temt bac! k in AustraJ. i: a. And
every othnr. feature, what he said about the lluelloet, what he said in
his own speech on the Budget is now'-O e says;' inoperativc!' It's a
great wqord which camie f rom President Nixon," " Ino-ecrative.
That not only have. they now abandoncd, as of Wedniesday
* week thle Budget proposal~ s they put up, but they i-ow say t~ hat if 7 c
have an electionfor the House of Representatives now, that is if
I accept their biackmrai-l-as I did in April last year, what would
they do? They ' d pass the Budget.
Now you see the whole design*. they don't have any objection to the
Budget; their own alternative Budget is now inoperative.' it's been
exposed; it's been abandoned and they say if we have an caection of
the House of Represcntati-ves -as if that's any buiesof the
blasted Senate then they'll1 pass the Budget through the Senate.
Or alternatively, if there's a double dissolution, we c,-n wait for
5 or 6 months to pass thE, Budget. The other thing is to have ai-j
Welection for hal~ f the Senate only. Now that-wouldn't be a bad ide!,;-
it's the usual time of the year to hzive them., I know that Sir
Robert Menzies said. I What a monsterous idea, what a monsterous
idea to have an election for the Senate in November or Decermber'.
* Now when Sir Robert Menzies was Prine MiniStEr he bad 6 cle( otions
for the Senate one of themt was in April, for the ScnatorF; ' to take
office in July and the other 4 were in December or November previously.
That is, 7 or 8 months ahlead of when the Senators were to tzake off ie.
And -the sixth one was in September, 9 nonths before they were to take
office. And now he says what an impertinence. it would ba to have a
half Senate election now, lie forgets what he did; he always had them
about thiz-tim-e of the year. But thejc-e is a catchb, because
*. Mr Bjelke-Peterson-and pardon me for meritioni. ng, it agai. 7n he said
that if the Goverior--e neral, in a usual waywrites to allt the State
Governors and says, ' T.; Jell I suggest arid requeist that you. j iss; ue the
writs to the Senators for your State en such and such a dae tiion
the Governor of Queensland, Sir Colin flannah you'd never heard ofhim
before he spoke out of tuirn a fortnight og-he will. lie advisr: d
by Mr Bj :) 7!. ke-Peter_, cni--and ha might e-vesi doitj J. V w i hout ar-advi . cc e' 1
say to the Governor-Cceneral, ' I ' ll ta'Ke no notice of you-,. sug-gestion,
I'll have it on a date which suits mne'. ' So that means that we, 
can'It get a Labor replacemnent for Senator Milliner, the ec-: A
La~~ Soninr in Qture( nsl cnd, r vCeat-.1cio or 1th-
Serl LOrs i~ n lueelsland. Fi-vc o! thmwC) ui. tahe off ice on tl-t
fir,, 1., of JrulJ% 7 ne xt but the-: succec,-r, the habor sucC%-_' s: rr to
Sent cor Mill. naar, would. L1-ake o) Ui ca in~ rc.-, i the day the pol. was
declare--d and. tbc-i won'lt have, they'll put~ off as longc as thoy
can qc -ting LEvhor replaccement 2-or:' a dccasfe. d Labor man. The-y
want to be able to pass motions to defer the Budget. They wi: U only
be able to p! ss thos.* e motions, as Senator Ste _ 1e Pall said, ' ove., r
a deSdc ormsen'.' T ha i-the way the ! J. berajls and the Country
Party operate. They take advantage of deceas'ed Senators and thcy
* want to bury daimiocracy in the process-. Because this : Ls what' tha
conse-rvatives, the reactionary iorces, in this countrv are precpe--! re~
* to do. For t-he first tii in 75 years they're prepared, it may bc,
to reject the Budget. They're certainly prepared to defer and
delay a Budget. It's never happened in 75 years: In the hnndrcrd an~ d
f if ty ' times that there has been a .1udget or Supply put up from. t--he
Huos fX~ preenat* Lves to the Senate. There could havo befenr 339
Bills rejected, Money Bills rejecte,, d, by the Senate on the OcCOE:-jofl3
when there was not a majority of Government support in the Snie
But it has never-happened before. For the first timc in the 25 veroYs
since we had proport-ional voting for the Senate, for the first tiim,
here in New South Wales, now, in Queensland, you have anti-Labor. Stat', e
Governments appointing a non-Labor successor to a Labor Senator,.
W When we put Labor's Attorney-Gerieral Murphy on the High Court to
pair off with the Liberal Attorney--cenera). B( rwick, they appoint an
anti-Labor Senator. That is, when Senator Milliner died they
appointed an anti-Labor successor. . For the first time in 20 years
U State Governments each State, both sides of politics have done
the wrong thing; the conservatives have done the wrong thinq. A-nd
now they are threatening that when I advise the Governor-Genieral to
* suggest a Senate election date for the State Governors, some oE tLhem
say they'll advise the Governors to disregard what the Governor-
General says. And this comes from people who are now asking the
Governor-General t~ o get them off the hook, to cover up for their
mistakes. There is nothing, ladies and reten thtIh
* conservative forces in this country are not prepared to do to get hold
of the people's money again: to reject or delay the Budget; to
Sreplace deceased Labor Senators with anti-Liabor Senators; to tell
UState Governors to disregard the re'quest of the Governor-General,
for the first time in the 25 years that Governor-* Generals have made
those requests.
. adies and Gentlemen, you can't trust the conservative forces in
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is immnensely encouraging for my collcaoiies
and-mD on the platform to see you come out here to the heart of
Sydney on a wet day in tens of thousands, millions of yoii here, to
* support demtocracy in this country. You've turned out in your lunch
time on a wet day in your millions, not just to support a Labor
* Government, t4-he present elected Governiment. You have come here
to support democracy itself. And from now on every political. Party
will realise that when thcre is an election for the House of
Representatives there will be an oelection for a Government to
govern for 3 years. And never again will the Senate, whoever bas a
majority or, which is enough, half the membors of the Sonatebb&amp;.
able to fru!-strate the House of Repzesentat-ives where GovernmeTints
are made and unzmade. 
Never alt. n, by tb: ciftening to cut-. o-t~ he Covy nme'nt igh b
Spend the-Laxes a they co:, 1az in, nav( cr agiain~, w. 1 the S nr. atE-b o
able to tircaten. thc~ t agavinsL the. cected Govcx~ iinent.*. 3.-ter thi
the Senat mTone'l. power ill1 be dcI.. r-( oyed. Niut. demo( er. cy will
be presccvcd. And the I~ our; e oif epresei-itative-s will. ' Las: t for its
full 3 years. Anid t~ he righ'LS of the ! Joiis(-of Rr--. prcse-t-at: ves
the pecpl I s Ilouse, to detenmtne hov. Jti@ peOplEts money. wL1b
spent on their behaflf will he vindicc. Cc a* rid c-nshrined
in the practice of this count.
Ladies and Gent lerrten,. seveft e an month!-ago you dcterninrA in t hb3
City, this State, this country, that you would have anothcr 3 years
of Labor Government..
The Government which you elected has a comlfortpJhle ' majority in tbe
House of Representat ives the. People. 7 House, thc IP ous whore
Governiments are made or un-made. Ladies and Gcntlemen, when a t th e
end of 1976, there ' s a doubl. dissolutior. to clear out all. the
obstructiorL of the Senate, the piled up Bill. which thicy'v
rejected twice, or in 1977 in thie nor-ma~ l tirie for a Hou!-e of
flprecntives election, wheri then you are againn e'-lect. Ixng the
* Government of" Autralia, I am confident that on our recordF our
Principles, you will once again have a Labor Government of"
Australia.: 



PRIME MiINISTER'S SPEECHI AT JTHIIE " TV I-IiKE IT AUSTRALIAN CAMiPATGl
ML'LBOUR.. NE, 26 OCTOBER 1975
You've just seen the man who often represents me
. I'm now speaking in my own right.
Ladies and gentlemen, we've all shown by our
presence tonight that we want to make TV Australian
we've acknowledged in the flesh, directly, the men and
women of talent who can make television Australian.
On behalf of the Australian Government I support their
efforts. But I must confess that it's become much more
difficult to do so than I thought when I pledged'this support
on behalf of my Party three years ago. It's not that
very much hasn't been attempted and quite an amount achieved
but I must mention two particular difficulties we have:
first, of course, it's only in recent years that the
Australian Government has tried to do anything about making
TV Australian. Before John Gorton, who is with us tonight
and except for John Gorton, no other Australian Governments.-
have ever tried to do anything about making television
Australian. And one of the early pleasures I had as head
of the present Government was to bring in-to the House, and
get through both Houses, the statute to establish the
Television School. Then we established a Film, Radio and
Television Board in the Australia Council; and we've
established an Australian Film Commission.
But there is one very long-seated difficulty that
we have in Australia there are too many television
commercial stations; and this stems from the fact that in
the later 1950' s and the early 1960' s the Australian
Government of . the day had to make sure that every one of
the newspaper families got its own two television stations.
And it is very much cheaper to be one of the few hundred
television outlets for television programs made in the United
States or even the-United Kingdom than it is to be one of
the half dozen catering for Australian programs.
With a great number of outlets it's cheaper and therefore
Australian television programs are too expensive, so they say.
And all the newspapers do their best to disparage the
Australian program and they do it under the guise of
telling their viewers that they are entitled to a choice:
they're entitled to the best, and the best -the inference
is comes from overseas.
And then there is one other very great difficulty
that we've found: the laws under which there is supervision
of radio and television in Australia, the Broadcasting and
Television Act, has not given sufficiently clear powers
and durisdiction to the Australian Broadcasting Control
Board. Where it has been possible by administrative action
to improve the Australian Broadcasting Commission or the
Australian Broadcasting Control Board the Government has done
so. The people who work for the A. B. C. now for the first
time have elected somebody themselves to represent them on the
A. B. C. And the Australian Broadcasting Control Board for
years said there were no more channels available and FM was
not possible in Australia. We now know that these were false 
statements. But still the Broadcasti c Control. Board can
maLe suggestions and can issue orde( rs and Lhe television
sti. tions can disregard them with impunity.
And twice the House of Representatives has passed amendments
to give the Broadcasting Control Board teeth and twice
the Senate has rejected those amendments. I will Eay
no more about the Senate, of course. But we've done our
best and until the laws are amended, radio and television
in Australia will be handicapped by the lack ofT proper
national power.
Ladies and gentlemen, we've all seen with our
own eyes, and heard with our own ears tonight the extent,
the range, the quality of talent, that there is in Australia
to produce Australian TV programs. And I believe your
voices, your response, to the artists, to the writers, to
the producers, will yeL be heard. Ladies and gentlemen,
we all have to work harder, resolutely, patiently, to see
that Australian talent is not only seen. in Australia, but
identified as Australian around the world. We have made
increasing sums of money available -' 73 Budget, ' 74 Budget,
Budget, when it geLs through. But this is not enough
we must all see , as Australians, that all our resources
are increasingly Australian whether they are material
or human-. And we have a wealth of human material, human
resources in this country, and not least in the performing
arts and in the most modern and pervasive of them all,
television itself. Let us make it Australian. 



EXTZAM~ FROM PRIME MMNS œ ER' S SPEH AT MIGRA!\ T RALLY,
M"= LUNE TOTN HAIL, 26 OXCIOBER 1975
Thank you for coming along in your thousands
to support the cause of democracy in Australia. In the last
twenty-five years, three million people whc were born
overseas have decided to live in Australia. Most of themi
have come from countries where democracy has disappeared or
where democracy is weak or where democracy is being
challenged. Most of them cafle to Australia because they had
heard that Australia was a mocracy, a Parliamentary democracy.
They had heard that Australia was a country where everybody
could express his political views and where every three years
people could go along to polling booths and pass the secret
votes for the Party which they themselves supported. And they
had heard that not only in the national Parliament of Australia
but in all the six States in Australia it was possible every
three years to choose a government you wanted.
Three years ago, no-one was more delighted than the
migrants in Australia to find that after a very vigorous
election campaign when all the political parties where able
to put their arguments on the radio or in the TV or at public
meetings, then you could have an election. In December 1972
you were delighted you were enthusiastic that you were able
to see a change of government in Australia. The people voted
against the government that there had been and they voted for
a new government, a Labor Government.
The change from the Liberal Country Party Government*
to the Labor Government was a peaceful change. The people
expressed their wishes and their wishes came about. They were
fulfilled; in Australia migrants saw all their hopes were
fulfilled. Migrants saw that at least in Australia, it was
possible by the democratic means of a vigorous and open
election campaign, by a secret vote on the polling day it was
possible to have a peaceful change of government. Migrants
expected, as all other Australians. expected, that the Government
which was elected in December 1972 would be able to govern
for. three years. / 2 
How many migrants were disappointed when the Government
which they helped to elect was forced to go to the people
prematurely in May l. ast year, only 1 years after the Government
was elected for three years? But once again the people of
Australia, including the millions of migrants who have votes,
once again they voted, after a vigorous campaign, in a secret
ballot, to have three more years of the Labor Government.
And now after another 17 months, before the
Government's 2nd term of office is half-way through, the
reactionary, the conservative, the fascist elements in
Australia are once again trying to interrupt democracy in
Australia, to frustrate democracy in Australia...
The Fraser fascists are now saying that because
they can get half the Senators voting against anything that
we put up, because they are therefore able to frustrate any
of our legislation, any of our motions, they are entitled to
govern the country... But-if you count up all the Members of Parliament
in Canberra, all the men and women who belong to the national
Parliament of Australia, there is a big majority of Labor men
and women over all -the others combined. That is, in the
Parliament as a whole and in the House of Representatives in
particular, Labor has a majority. Labor is entitled to govern.
And I will point out to you what the obstruction
has been this last week and the week before. The Budget Bills,
the basic Bills which enable the Australian Government to pay
the Public Servants, to pay the soldiers, to pay for services and
contracts which'people have provided, that's in a couple of
Budget Bills. And when they've gone to the Senate, the Senators
haven't voted against the Bills, they've just carried a motion
to defer the Bills, to postpone them.
And the device they u sed is to move an amendment
to the Bills that they don't be debated until there is an election
for the House of Representatives. And that motion has been 
carried three times in the week before last, . three times
last week, because a Labor Senator from Queensland died.
And Mr Bjelke-Petersen appointed an anti-Labor Senator
to take the place of the Labor Senator who died. If the
Labor Senator had still been alive he would have been voting
as he had all the years hie was in Parliament, he would have
been voting with the Labor Party. And in that case, these
six motions to adjourn the Bill would have been defeated
because there would have been as many Senators voting
against the motion as were voting in favour of the motion.
That is, there would have been an equal number of votes
and the motion to adjourn would have been defeated. And
as Senator Steele Hall has said: the motion to adjourn the
debate on the Budget Bills was carried over a dead man's corpse.
Because the Liberals know that if they were'to have a vote
to reject the Budget, then some of their people would vote
to pass it. Because not all Liberals are fascists; there
are some decent Liberals...
The only way that Mr Fraser can keep all his people
in line, is to movre an amendment to defer the vote to put
it off, to postpone it, to stall it, because if he were to have
a vote on passing or rejecting the Budget, t-he Budget would
be passed. And it would be a very good Budget indeed,
because there are three million people who would pay smaller
taxes once the Budget is passed. And there are half a million
people who have to pay income tax now, who will not have to
pay income tax once the Budget is passed. And instead of
having these tax concessions or deductions, which benefit
the rich people much more than they benefit the poor people,
there will be a system of rebates which will be of equal value
to everybody, whatever their incomes. This is a very good
Budget indeed. It is the best Budget this country has put to
the Parliament for years and years.
This Budget will particularly help migrants, it
will help'the family man, the working man, the underpriviledged,
the disadvantaged, the newcomers. It is of particular benefit 
for migrants. And the Liberals don't want you to feel and
enjoy the benefits of Bill Hayden's Budget. And they've
got no alternatives themselves. Because when Mr Fraser started
the debate on the Budget on the Opposition side, everybody
saw the disadvantages that would come if they got the chance.
Because there is going to be two lots of income tax, not
only Federal income tax but State income tax on top of that,
if the Liberals become the national Government. And now
they say that their Budget proposals are inoperative. You
remember that infamous word that President Nixon's Press
Secretary came out with, that a particular thing that the
President had said was " inoperative". Well that's what
they say now about their Budget. And they don't vote
against the Budget; they say that if there's going to be
an election for the House of Representatives, they will pass
the Budget... They're blackmailing you, they're depriving you
of the benefits of this Budget.
You ladies and gentlemen who come from overseas
have seen from your own bitter experience, that of your mothers
and fathers, how the reactionary, conservative and fascist elements
in * your countries have stopped at nothing to destroy democracy.
It's warning to see on an occasion like this, that
the people of Melbourne, and particularly the people in
Melbourne who were born overseas, want to see that democracy
is preserved in Australia. Because migrants in particular
realise that in my Government they have the first national
Government which has ever been interested in their welfare.
Because Liberal Government the government of Menzies and
Holt and Gorton and Billy McMahon once the migrants arrived
at the airport or at the port, they lost interest in them.
They were only interested until they landed or alighted in
Australia. After that they were factory fodder. And the
migrants. in Australia have been the principal victims of our
unplanned cities and our impoverished schools and our expensive
hospitals. 
You know it' s the Labor Government which has
made sure that wherever people live in Australia, wherever
they were born, whatever their occupation, whatever their
income, they will have equal opportunities in this country.
It is the Labor Government which has seen that You
are entitled to get citizenship rights all after-the same
length of time: no first, second, third grades of citizens;
everybody who comes to Australia is treated the same.
You are all entitled to portability of pensions; if you
become entitled to any social welfare payments in Australia
then you can now enjoy those payments anywhere in the world.
And if you have dependent wives or children or parents
in another country, you can get benefit from your taxation
for them before they get here. You're now having ethnic
radio stations; you can hear on the radio, you can hear
programs of your own choice, in your own language when you
want. You now have legal aid, you have Medibank, and if you
ring up a Federal Government Department you can speak to
people in your own language or you can get your documents
translated. We have looked for people to appoint to government
commissions and boards and departments. Because we have
appointed migrants to Qantas; we've appointed migrants
to the Universities Commission' we'ye appointed migrants
to the Australia Council; we've appointed migrants to the
International Women's Year National Committee; we'vye
appointed migrants to the Australian Broadcasting Commission;
we've appointed migrants as Head of Government Departments.
Certainly we've been criticised for these things. But there
is no doubt, for the first time, under the Labor Government
elected in 1972 and re-elected in 1974 for a three year term,
migrants are being considered for government appointments.
You are now getting all the opportunities which
are available to people who were born here. Don't lose it:
support the Labor Government which brought these benefits. ./ 6 
6.
The Government that you elected twice, the
Government which you most recently elected in May last year,
the Parliament which was first able to meet on the 9th
July last year, the Parliament, the Government, which you
elected for three years still has a Labor majority.
And with your support and the support of millions of your
fellow Australians, you will have a three year Government,
a people's Government, with a majority in'the People's House. 


PRIME MINISTER'S CURTIN MEMORIAL LECTURE,AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, E,CANBERXIA 29 OCTOBER 19750C1. " I HIThirty-four years ago -October 1941 -in\@ dl't atpolitical upheaval and at a time of supreme danger f t a,the House of Representatives asserted its unchallenged andexclusive right to make and unmake Australian governments. As aresult of that assertion of its exclusive authority, John Curtinbecame Prime Minister of Australia.It is timely to recall tonight the manner in which heachieved office and the manner by which the first CurtinGovernment, one of the very great, if not the very greatest ofall Australian Qovernments, was maintained for more than twoyears thereafter. It was a. Government formed solely through amajority of the House of Representatives and maintained solelyat the will of the majority in the House of Representatives.Neither in attaining nor retaining the Prime Ministership didCurtin ever have to consider the state of the political partiesin the Senate. Thus, in the most critical time in this nation'shistory, one of the,-, strongest of our governments was sustainedby the narrowest possible majority in the House of Representatives.But that bare majority was enough for the highest possible ofall purposes the security and survival of this nation. Therecould be no more striking proof if proof were ever neededofthe power and absolute supremacy of the majority even amere majority -in the House of Representatives.. The Australian Labor Party has happened to form federalgovernments during significant parts of the three great worldcrises of the tiwentieth century the two World Wars and theGreat Depression. Naturally enough we have tended to believethat the people of Australia have turned to Labor for leadershipin times of the greatest peril.. This is only true in the veryloosest sense. The eloctions of 1914 and 1929 which both resultedin the return of Labor Governments were in no wiay fought on theSgreat international issues then about to engulf the world. Andin Curtin's case, the government was formed not directly as aesalt of any election at all, but by the decision of the House~ Qof lepresentatives -by the will of the majority in the House. of . aepresentatives. The prolonged political crisis of 1941 was about numbers* in the-House of Representatives. Throughout that crisis theMenzies Government and then the Padden Government was supportedby a clear majority in the Senate. But the numbers in the Senatewere never a consideration throughout the turmoil. It was onlybecause of-his precarious position in the House of Representativesthat Menzies sought to form a national government with Laborparticipation. He wanted to build a reliable working majority* in the House of Representatives. He could not do that unlesshe had Labor support. He failed. He resigned. The Fadden Budget* was then defeated by the votes of the two Independents, Messrs* Coles and Wilson. That is the majority in the House of Representativeschanged and therefore the Government of Australia changed. And* with that paper-thin majority in the House of Representatives,I
2-despite its-minbrity position--in* the Senate,-the CiirtinGovernment* went-on'. t mobilise..-Australja anal to steer Australiathrough the perils'of. 1942-and 1-943. That Government was notonly Curtin's. vindication; it was'-a vindication " of the authorityof the House of-Representatives, a vindication never to be forgotten.episodeIt is especially worth recalling those days because theepiodeillustrates the novelty of the pretensions to make andunmake governments now being put forward on behalf of the Senate.The significant thing about 1941 is that throughout the period,the state of the Senate and the opinions of Senators were alwaysirrelevant to the central issue, and totally irrelevant to the* outcome. No historian today would view the position of the. Senatewhich resulted from the 1940 elections as an important factor inthe situation any more than did the politicians of the dayanymore than Menzies or Fadden or Curtin took it into account.the Melbourne University is now publishing the second volume of' teCaucus Minutes, the minutes of the Parliamentary Labor Partyfrom 101 to 1949. The most intriguing revelations intriguingSperhaps in more than one sense of the word are about the periodW 1940 1941. In particular, there is the correspondence betweenSMenzies, Curtin, Fadden,* Earle Page and Beazley about the possibleformation of a national government. In all that correspondence,you will never find the Senate mentioned.In those days; by those men, in the great matter, theSenate was treated with the reverent silence due to all irrelevantanachronisms. We do not however have to go back thirty-four years;recent as that is in terms of constitutional history we have to* go back no further than our own experience the elections of1972 and 1974. The elections of 1972 were for the House of'&gt; Representatives alone; whatever the result had been the stateof the Parties in the Senate had to remain unchanged; an anti--, Labor majority was guaranteed until at least July 1974. NoAustralian at that time considered that the Senate would be a&gt; cru,: ial factor in determining the timing of future elections.Nobody approached the 1972 campaign with any thought othertha~ i what Australians were doing then was electing a governmentfor a normal three-year term. There might have been some fleetingthought given to the possibility of the circumstances by whichLabor, if successful, might be brought to the need for a double. dissolution. But certainly no-one seriously considered thepossibility of the House of Representatives being forced to anelection by the refusal of Supply by the Senate. And no-oneconsidered the poss. ibility of a double dissolution triggered offby the threat of refusal of Supply by the Senate. It has been* a remarkable example of the unthinkable becoming apparentlyquite acceptable. It has since appeared that the Government had barelytaken office when the Opposition in the Senate began planningto use its numbers to force an early House of Representativeselection. In the words of Senator Withers speaking in April 1974:" We embarked on a course some 12 months ago tobring about a House of Representatives election."
-3-The course of action was being prepared by Senatorswho had taken office one and a half and four and a half yearsbefore the Labor Government, and who had been elected two andfive years before the Governmnt. In the present * crisis therehas been a tendency to overlook the fact that the rejectionof money Bills or the refusal of Supply by the Senate doesnot of itself and cannot of itself lead to an election for theSenate. It is aimed only against the House of* Representatives.The fact that grounds may exist for a double dissolution onother issues is incidental. It may be politically relevantbut it is constitutionally irrelevant. In April 1973* when thiscourse was first contemplated there were no grounds for adouble dissolutionno legislation had been twice rejected bythe Senate with a lapse of three months between the firstrejection and the second introduction. Nor when the rejectionof the 1974 Budget was threatened last October did the groundsexist for another double . dissolution. The slate had been wipedclean by the 1974 elections. The rejection of the Budget last,,. year could only hav&amp; led. to a House of Representatives election.The existence of grounds for a double dissolution now,on twenty-two Bills which have nothing whatever to do with theBudget, only obscures -the real implications and the realintentions of the actions of the Senate. To accept the Senate'sclaims now would be to accept the right of the Senate to havethe House of Representatives dissolved without itself havingto go to the people.It is now clear that behind the present constitutionalstruggle there is a wider political question the answer to whichis central to the way in which Australia's whole political lifewill develop for the rest of this century and beyond. Thequestion is not just whether this particular government, the* Whitlam, Government, will be allowed to govern for the term forSwhich it was elected. The question is whether any duly electedreformist government will be allowed to govern in the future.What is at stake is whether the people who seek change andreform are ever again to have any confidence that it can beachieved through the normal parliamentary processes.0 During my period as Leader of the OppositionlI addressed-myself to three principal tasks: to develop a coherent program-of relevant reform; to convince a majority of Australians thatthose reforms were relevant; and to convince the Labor movementas a whole that the Parliamentary institutions were relevant inachieving worthwhile reform. The great organisational battlesbetween 1967 and 1970, particular in Victoria, were essentiallyabout that third task. It was the toughest of all.I would not wish on any future leader of the AustralianLabor Party the task of having to harness the radical forces tothe restraints and constraints of the parliamentary system ifI were now to succumb in the present crisis. it is clear thatthe basic attack which has been mounted against, the LaborGovernment from April 1973 onward was not an attack on itscompetence or its effectiveness but on its very legitimacythe legitimacy of any reform government now or in the fut-ure. ./ 4
-4-There is a certain poignancy for mec in delivering thisCurtin Lecture at a time of deep constitutional crisis ' and highconstitutional drama. It was very mnuch due to John Curtin thatI first became concerned about the Australian Constitution.In 1961 1 delivered the second Curtini Memorial Lecture uinder theauspices of the University of Western Australia branch of theAustralian Labor Party. I said then:" My interest in constitutional matters stems from* the-time when John Curtin was Prime Ministor.The Commonwealth Parliament's powers were than attheir most ample and it was constitutionally, ifnot always politically, more open to a Labor* Government to carry out its policies than it is inpeace time. Johin Curtin, however, saw -that he waspresiding over a passing phase. He was not contentwith the paradox that the Labor Party was free toenact its policies in times of war alone.Accordingly, in 1944 he sponsored a referendumto give the Federal Parliament post-war powers.His motives for holding the referendum were basedon patriotism and experience. He argued the casewith his full logic and eloquence. The oppositionto the referendum was spurious and selfish. Thearguments were false. My hopes were dashed by theoutcome and from that moment I determined to do* all I could to modernise the Australian Constitution."The title of that lecture was '. Democratic Socialismwithin the Constitution". Some years previously, in 1957,I delivered the Chifley Memorial Lecture in Melbourne. Thetitle of that lecture was '' The Constitution versus Labor'.It. would be fair to say that the difference in the two subjectsexpressed the development of my thinking over the interveningfour years. In the Chifley Lecture I was concerned withthe difficulties confronting the Australian Labor Party incarrying out its policies under the federal system. In the 1961Curtin lecture, I emphasised the opportunities a Labor Governmentwould have to carry out its policies under -the federal. system asit then stood and as it still stands. I summed up by saying:" Members of the Parliament must accept the permanentnecessity of seeking the people's consent beforethey can nationalise an industry. This should notbe regarded as too stifling an inhibition in these* times. Socialists are now more concerned with thecreation of opportunities than the imposition ofrestraints. Within our own nation we do not haveto ration scarcity but plan abundance TheAustralian Government has as much constitutionalfreedom as any other national government to plan thepublic sector in Australia and to make arrangementswith other countries. Through its financialhegemony it can create better conditions in transport,housing, education and health; it can create newindustries; it can create new communities. Throughinternational arrangements it can share in the moreorderly and equitable production, distribution andexchangeof goods and skills. Socialists have toplay the most dynamic role in the relatively skilledand affluent community inhabiting our remote, dependentand unevenly developed continent."
To a very great extent the broad lines of actionIthen foreshadowed were to form, after years of refinement anddevelopment in the Parliament and within the Party, the, programon which the Party was elected in 1972 and which the AustralianGovernment has endeavoured to carry out during the two Parliamentsin which we have had a clear House of Representatives majoritythetruncated twenty-eighth Parliament and this threatened,turbulent twenty-ninth Parliament.One of the ironies of the present situation is thatthe philosophy of the program assumes acceptance of the rulestheground rules of a system which is inherently conservative.The program accepts the limitations of the Cornstitution, theunwieldiness of the Parlirnentary system as an instrument forexecutive action and the frustrations of the federal system.We accepted the rules of the game. In our innocence we thoughtthat our opponents did too.In practice the real difficulties in carrying out the.pogram have not arisen in any serious degree from the obviouslimitations imposed by the Constitution and the federal. system.* True, there has been obstruction and non-co-operation and oftensheer bloodymindedness on the part of the States. And true,we have so far failed in attempts to secure amendments to theConstitution. These involved setbacks;. but the Government canlive with them. I know it would disappoint him terribly, butI must confess I never lie awake at nights worrying aboutMr Bjelke-Petersen. I can easily put up with the pretensions* of the Premier's palindromic pro-consul or as easily putthem down. The really intractable difficulties, however, havearisen from problems quite external to the Constitution and* the federal system. These have been political and economic,but the economic difficulties themselves have been vastly., compounded by political distortions. So in a very real sensewithoutany attempt on my part to escape responsibility or to* deny mistakes and misjudgements Australia's present difficulties,M. ot least the economic difficulties, spring from a gross andprolonged distortion of normal political processes.I first put our economic problems in their worldperspective but, equally, I do suggest that our ability totake national action to ameliorate the consequences of aninternational situation has been seriously compromised by anartificially-induced domestic political crisis.When my Government was elected our aim was to financeour new programs from growth. But world-wide inflation andrecession frustrated this objective. This is no mere self-* justification. The whole industrialised world is currentlygoing through the worst peacetim~ e inflation on record and thedeepest recession since the 1930' s. Within the OECD, themembership of which includes virtually every industrialisedcountry in the world, the average rate of inflation jumped from3.9 per cent per annum in the decade 1962 to 1972, to 7.9per cent in 1973 and 13.4 per cent in 1974. Real Gross NationalProduct which rose at the rate of 5.4 per cent per annum inthe decade to 1972 declined slightly for the OECD countries? a whole in 1974 and is expected to show a decline of about5per cent in 1975. / 6
-6-The OECD Economic Outlook stated on 17 July 1975:" The present recession in OECD countries is themost serious since the war. It is remarkable notonly for its length and depth a third consecutive. half-year of negative growth has now been recordedfor the area as a whole but also for its widespreadnature: virtually every OECD country grew by lessthan-its miedium-term average rate in 1974, and noeconomy is expected to take up slack in 1975.The margin of idle resources in the OECD area is nowthe largest in the post-war period, with unemploymentat record levels. The forecasts presented in theDecember Economic Outlook, and to a greater extentthose being made at that time by national authorities,proved to be too optimistic. Industrial outputin the matjor countries fell very sharply in the lastquarter of 1974 and the first quarter of this year.The extent and simultaneous nature of the declinewas unlike anything recorded in the post-war period.The combined GNP of the major countries, which wasthought at the time to have increased marginally inthe second half of 1974, is now estimated to havefallen, at an annual rate, by over one per cent.output was expected to continue stagnating in thefirst half of this year; it may in fact have fallenat an annual rate of about five per cent. TheDecember Economic Outlook gave reasons for supposing. that the balance of uncertainties attaching to the. forecasts was on the downside; but the extent to which thisproved to be the case is astonishing."There is no way in which Australia could have escapedbeing caught up in these disruptive world-wide economic developments.We are, after all, a major trading country, so what happens toour major trading partners the United States, Japan and theUnited Kingdom is bound to affect us. It is estimated that inthe course of the recession industrial production fell bySpei7 cent in Japan, by over 14 per cent in the United States andby. over 8 per cent in the United Kingdom. Even West Germany,wh . ch has ridden out this storm better than most, suffered afall in industrial production of ' over 11 per cent. What is more,these declines should be viewed against strong upward trendspreviously existing at least for the United States, Japan andWest Germany; on this basis the loss of potential output has beenmuch greater than these figures imply.Against this background, the OECD forecast for a realgrowth of 2 per cent of GDP in Australia this calendar year isrelatively good, disappointing by past standards though it maybe. In the same period, the OECD expects real growth in Japanto rise by 1 per cent and to fall by 2 per cent in Germany andalmost 4 per cent in the United States. And overall, growthof real GDP in all the OECD nations in calendar 1975 is expectedtLo be minus 1 1 per cent. In an international situation such asthis, it was inevitable that Australia would also be faced withsizeable economic problems. ./ 7
-7-Havin~ g said that, it is impossible to exaggerate thedegree to which the impact of these world-wide trends has beenexacerbated by internal political disruptions. It is impossibleto exaggerate the additional. pressures placed upon theGovernment in trying to ameliorate those difficulties. For thefact is that during two critical periods in the nation'--economic cycle, the normal business of Government has beendisrupted and interrupted. In his Calwell Memorial Lecture.on 22 September the Treasurer, Bill Hayden, emphasised thedisruption that-had occurred because Australia was forced tohave two general elections within eighteen mnonths and whichwould occur again if Australia were forced to have a thirdelection in less than three years. Mr Hayden said:" Surprisingly, it is not widely realised that thatvery act of premature elections itsel~ f is enormouslydestabilising to the administration of this country." For instance, at the time of the double dissolution* last year, the administration of national affairswas more or less in a state of suspension forsome thing like three months during the electioncampaign and the post-election uncertainty until themarathon Senate count was completed." The distraction of the election diverted, attentionfrom detailed social and economic management,especially from the latter." The community should be aware that the economycannot afford that again.n " In retrospect, it seems that there were a numberof significant economic developments during thatperiod which were subsequently to create problems." If the undistracted attention of the Governmenthad been available to attend to economic management. at that time, the ill effects of those developmentsmight at least have been moderated."That was the Treasurer speaking on 22 September. Noneof us really foresaw what would be happening a mere month later.Quite frankly we did accept at their face value the repeatedstatements made by the Leader of the Opposition. Clive ofIndia contemplating the plunder he might have engorged confessedhe stood amazed at his own moderation. Sometimes I stand amazed,. at our own trustfulness.In this situation we should be concerned not only withthe political disruption but the psychological effects thatthis disruption must inevitably have upon the economy, upon thepeople, and not least, upon the public service. ./ 8
-8-The Budget itself is a nicely balanced even aprecariously balanced attempt to deal with the competingdemands of pressing economic problems and of social justice.It is as adventurous and as imaginative a Budget as has everbeen attempted in this country or in any comparable country.For any significant Budget, and this one in particular, atthis time in particular, its effectiveness depends on a wholerange of subtle, intangible, psychological factors. It wasin recognition of this, for instance, that the Treasurer, veryproperly, very-commendably, took a special step to ensure thatthe leader of the trade union movement the spokesman forthat section of the Australian community upon which thesuccess or failure of the Budget must chiefly turn shouldunderstand its underlying nature and purpose.But what authority can a Budget have,, what successcan a Budget strategy have if it is delayed week after week--and those the most . critical weeks in the financial year?There is another very serious aspect of this presentcrisis which perhaps only those of us who have to live and workmost of our time in this city will fully appreciate. Thiscapital is, arguably, the most pol. itical and most politicisedScity in the world, not excepting Washington. We are not the'. only City cxeated as the political and administrative capitalof a nation. But the curious combination of isolation andintimacy in this city, of all the people who live and work init, makes it a uniquely sensitive organism. It is extraordinarilydifficult for the normal administration, the normal decisionmakingprocesses, the normal operations of the on-going publicservice to continue unaffected, uninterrupted almost at anylevel -when this city is preoccupied by a political crisis.I think we are all aware of this. Without putting it too high,there is always a very real risk in Canberra that an,-overwhelming political preoccupation will mean administrativeparalysis. I think it appropriate I should point this outhere in this city and in this University, which gives Canberraits best claim to be a true city in the full meaning of the word.V. It is something of which everybody who has to make decisionsabout this present crisis should take note.I I want to put it to you that we have an extraordinarysituation combining great international difficulties withartificially imposed political difficulties. Yet it is asituation in which the elected Government is determined to continuethe business of Government and is duty-bound to continue thebusiness of Government. The world's economic problems willcompound Australia's problems and only a slow recovery can behoped for. Encouraging signs are emerging; the wisdom of theBudget is now apparent if it is allowed a chance to work.Nevertheless, highly undesirable implications of inflationimpose a limit on the rate of recovery. Control of inflationis the Government's first economic priority. Unless inflationis curbed the nation's productive capacity will run down and jobopportunities will diminish. Failure to control inflation wouldmean that the present undesirable unacceptable -high levelsof unemployment would worsen. / 19
-9-This Government rejects any policy of deliberately creatingmassive unemployment and widespread business failures in orderto stop inflation abruptly but until inflation is controlledwe will have to live with unemployment at a level that would,in other circumstances, be unacceptable; otherwise we will notbe able to achieve our goal of full employment in the future.The Government is adhering resolutely to its wagespolicy and to support of indexation. There already areindications of the value of its resolute stand. But we canonly successfully continue that stand if the elected Governmenthas, and is seen to have, authority and legitimacy.The Government has adjusted personal income tax scalesto give relief to those most in need from the higher incidenceof taxation due to inflation and to remove the inequities fromthe income tax whereby the well-to-do benefited more fromconcessional deductions than those on lower incomes.. TheGovernment has not hesitated to intervene in industrial disputes* that threaten its wages policy.The Government is concerned to stimulate and maintainbusiness confidence and to create an environment in which businessrcwill invest. Consistent with the Government's wishes thePriesJustification Tribunal has placed greater emphasis onfuture profitability and investment plans of industry. TheMathews Committee recommended a changed approach to the valuationof trading stocks for business purposes and the indexation of* depreciation allowances. The enormous revenue costs and thepractical difficulties of implementation left the Government noalternative but to set these recommendations aside and to adoptan alternative recommendation made by the Mathews Committee toreduce company tax and also to continue the system of doublerates of depreciation beyond 30 June 1975, extending it to all-vsectors of commerce arid industry.Let me put this as succinctly as I can: the programnof the Australian Labor Government has been designed to achieveiandindeed has achieved a significant redistribution of the~&gt; national wealth in favour of the majority but the base on whichthat redistribution has been achieved and in a mixed economythe private sector must be a powerful part of that base iS notnow strong enough to sustain the continuing upward redistributionof wealth or, perhaps, to sustain the great gains that havealready been made.As to the reality of the redistribution,-let meinstance two examples employees and pensioners that is, theoverwhelming majority of Australian adults.Average minimum award rates have risen by 55 per centand average earnings by 45 per cent over the past two yearswhile the cost of living, as measured by the increasedby 32 per cent in the same period.
using a slightly different base period between1969 and 1974 the average income of those aged 65 or ' overwhose principal source of income i-s Government social service* benefits rose by 74 per cent while the C. P. I. rose by 38 percent. For those people it represented a rise in real incomein that period of around 26 per cent.* I must emphasise, however, that in our mixed economythe base on which these advances have been made must bestrengthened. Not least of the purposes of the Budge:, thistremendously important Budget now put in a sort of limbo bythe Senate-is to strengthen that base by increasing theprofitability and viability of the private sector.. A coupleof months ago, business might have said that the one thingneedful to restore confidence was a change of Government.Increasingly business now recognises that the one thing needfulis to pass the Budget, to end the present political crisis,_to let the elected-Government govern.I return to the beginning: the basic principle is thatthe elected government must be enabled to govern and that theelected Government is made or unmade through the House ofRepresentatives. I quote Quick and Garran first in time andfirst in authority on our Constitution writing at the timeof the founding of the Australian Parliament:" The House of Representatives is not only thenational chamber; it is the democratic chamber;it is the grand repositry and embodiment of theliberal principles of government which pervadethe entire constitutional fabric. It is thechamber in which the progressive instincts andpopular aspirations of the people will be mostlikely to make themselves first felt... by theConstitution, it is expressly intended to besuch a House, and by its organisation andfunctions, it is best fitted to be the area inwhich national progress will find room fordevelopment." I put it to you with all earnestness: it is because* this Government has attempted to make this Parliament theinstrument for reform, for long overdue change, for progress,for the redistribution of wealth, for the uplifting of theunderprivileged, for the reduction of the privileges of greatwealth and deeply entrenched vested interests, an instrumenttowards equality of opportunity for all Australians, that ouropponents and those vested interests have from the very beginning,as Senator Withers revealed, embarked on a course to destroythis Governmentat the earliest opportunity. l
-11-I fully expect that the authority of the House ofRepresentatives shall be asserted and established quitesoon and in such a way as to assert and establish it beyonddoubt for all time. I fully expect that the authority ofthat House will be as successfully asserted and established,in a very different time, in a very different context, butwith the same significance and value for this nation as itwas 34 years ago -as it was to make the greatest of allmy predecessors. John Curtin -Prime Minister of Australia.
3q~~ 2~ o~ 9P jib / VcAr''( Pc! DEPLOAN CARD DETAIL Call No.I, ro II~ e A cusiun N o T. P RIMMEIN ISTAENRCD A BINET91027459 0 0



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT THE WHYLL WORKERS CLUB S
1 NOVEMBER 1975
engagement f or months past up at Port Augusta
tomorrow morning. It's a diamond jubilee, an ecclesiastical
diamond jubilee. And I get so few of these invitations I
found it irresistable. So I though in the present situation
I should spend a day on the way at Alice Springs and then, of
course, we flew on here and I welcome very much the opportunity
to drop in at the Club.
There is perhaps a couple of things I might say to
you. The situation that we have in the national Parliament is
one to which you're very much accustomed in South Australia.
Because there is no part of Australia which is so very much
aware of the intrusions and the usurpations of an Upper House
of Parliament as you are in South Australia. Because the
Legislative Counrcil here for years has rejected legislation
from the House of Assembly and for years has prevented
South Australia having a decent, equal, fair electoral system.
And Don Dunstan has suffered from this and Steele Hall suffered
from this.. That is, anybody who wanted to bring about any
reforms has suffered from the Upper House of South Australia.
Now for three years that we've had a Labor Government
in the Australian Parlia. ment, we've been suffering from the
Senate, the Upper House there. And in the last three years
the Senate has rejected more Bills than it had rejected in
the previous 72 years of its existence. Fewer than 70 Bills
were rejected from 1901 to the end of 1972 when we came in;
and since then it's rejected over 90 Bills. Now it's come to
a climax when the Senate has gone on strike over the Budget.
It hasn't rejected the Budget Bills. But for three times on
each of the three basic Bills it has carried a motion to defer
the debate, to go on strike, as far as the Budget is concerned.
And they are doing this partly because they know that if there
is a vote on the Budget it would be carried.
Mr Fraser's own Senators, some of the Liberals, have
said they would not vote against the Budget; that was
Senator Bessell of Tasmania said it on Four Corners last weekend
and he also said that there were several others of the same
mind. So if it came to a vote on the Budget it would be passed.
Now the attempt t-hat is being made is to stand over
the elected Government. Because in Australia as in British
democracies all round the world, the Government is formed by the
Party or Parties with a majority in the Lower House, the House
of Commons or the House of Representatives. That's where the
Prime Minister has to be; that's where the Treasurer must be.
And, you know, the Senate in Australia now, is behaving as the
House of Lords used to do before 1911. Just as Asquith in 1911
broke the power of the House of Lords over Money Bills we now
in Australia have to break the power of the Senate over Money
Bills. / 2 
-2-
As you know, in Britain the House of Lords can't hold
up any Money Bill for more than three months. And it's never
tried even to do that. And in Australia for the last 75 years
the Constitution says that the Senate can't initiate Money Bills;
it can't amend Money Bills; and all. it can do is make requests
to amend them. And the House of Representatives may then,
if it likes, make amendments. But this time the Senate hasn't
rejected, it hasn't in fact even made requests. But what it is
trying to do is to say that whenever a Government hasn't got a
majority in the Senate, then the Senate can bring about an
election for the House of Representatives.
And they tried this in April last year and I then
accepted the position, we had a double dissolution but for
three months we were without a Parliament, it took so long to
hold the election and to count the results. I'm not prepared
to have another three months without a Parliament at this stage.
I'm not prepared to say that the Government which has been twice
elected, twice elected for a three year term is to be interrupted
and brought to a halt and the whole system interrupted at the
behest of tShe Senate. Because the Liberal and the Country Party,
they haven't got a majority in the Senate, they had 165,000
fewer votes last May for the Senate than we had, 165,000 votes
more for Labor candidates for the Senate in May last year,
than for the candidates for the Senate of all the other Parties
in the Senate. And we ended up with 29 Senators; they ended
up with 29 Senators and there were two Independents. One of
the, Steele Hall, has remained pretty independent. The other
one joined the Libe-rals. But they still haven't got a majority
inm the Senate. We have a majority in the House of Representatives;
we have a majority in the whole Parliament. The Joint Sitting
showed that. We are entitled to govern. When we went to the
people they elected us for three years; the other side have
not accepted that. Never before in the 75 years that there's
been an Australian ? Parliament has the Senate ever voted against
a Money Bill. Althorgh again and again, 139 occasions, there
have been Money BillIs passed by the Senate although the government
of the day didn't have a majority of the Senate. Because if the
Senate is evenly divided then the motion or Bill is not passed.
Now it's on that technicality that they're relying. Although if
it went to a vote there would be sufficient Liberal Senators to
vote in favour of the Bill, for the money, the Budget and it
would be passed. What's be'e-n happening is that Bjelke-Petersen, the
Country Party Prem~ ier of Queensland, appointed an anti-Labor
man a scab, Pat the Rat to succeed a Labor man. And if
Senator Milliner '-ad still been alive he would, as he had always
throughout his life of service in the Labor movement, have
supported the Labor Par-ty. And the motion to defer the debate
would have been defeated because there would have been as many
people voting agars it as voting for it. But it's purely over
a dead man's body as Steele Hall has put it, that this motion
to defer the Budge-t, to go on strike in the Senate, has been
carried. 
A -3-
Now I want to conclude on this: an area like this
at the top of the Gulf, this Iron Triangle you depend very much
on Australian Government employment, and Australian Government
orders. Places like this would be hard up indeed if it were
not the Australian National Railways; if it were not for the
subsidies which are paid for the ships which are constructed
in the largest shipbuilding yards in Australia, here in Whyalla,
And you know better than most people in Australia what happens
to your employment and to your amenities and to your prosperity
if the, payments made by the Australian Government are interrupted
or reduced. My Government has been the first one which has
taken any interest in local amenities. Your Council here, has
received money directly to spend as it sees fit. In the last
two years it's in the Budget at the monent which is waiting
to go through you've have assistance from the Australian
Governmen-for sporting and cultural and educational facilities,
such as no-previous Australian Government has ever paid.
Let me give you some of the figures on that:
Local Government here, the Whyalla City Council last year got
$ 178,000 from the Australian Governmnent. In this year's
Budget there's $ 210,000. The Australian Assistance Plan uptil
24th of October so far-has $ 18,000, and that's the rate it
will be getting for the rest of the year, if the Budget goes
through. You've had a community recreation centre, $ 360,000
from the Australian Government. And a supplementary grant of
$ 40,000; you've had things for the lifesaving club; for the
sew erage program $ 73,000; pensioner dwellings $ 105,000;
the RED Scheme over half a million.
Ladies and ilentlemen these are indications of what
the Labor Government of Australia has been trying to do for areas
like tais which no Drevious Australian Government has ever
attem--, ed to do. oWe set out to do it. We want to make
certaina that company tzw-ans, such as Whyalla or Port Augusta or
Port Pinie, are assisr~ ed to provide the amenities which people
want in their spare timne: education, culture, recreation
and so on. No Austral-ian Government has ever done it before.
Previous Governments afforded not to. Do you want a Liberal
Government again to cut off all these things? You have your
answer mate; you have your answer. The Australian people
have twice elected an Australian Labor Party Government in Canberra.
It's entitled to govern. And you can't have the usurpations,
my Lord, of the Senate taking over from the elected government
of Australia. Ladies and gentlemen, stand firm on this. So
many people came to Australia because they thought that it was
possible here to elect a government at a secret ballot to change
the Government by peaceful means; their faith is being destroyed
by these impatient, t:--ese unconstitutional, these greedy people
in the Senate: the LIberal and Country Party. In an area like
this in the next few months you will have an election for the
Senate. Make certain-that once again you give a majority in
this area, this State, 1 to the Labor Party candidate. 



PRIME MINISTER.' S ADDRESS AT A FUND-RAISING LUNCH, 0
ALICE SPRINGS, 1 NOVEMBER 1975
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you
very much indeed for the organisation you've put into the
events of today. It was a great meeting in the park this
morning and this is a magnificent gathering for lunch now.
And I'm most heartened at the reception you gave the newest
minister, the youngest minister, in the Australian Government.
Only 31 years old, he's been in the Parliament less than
six years; I can assure you there is very great com~ petition
to get into the ministry. But you've been able to hear and
see the quality of the man, who less than six years in the
Parliament, barely 31 years of age, is able to win a ballot,
a secret ballot, among very tough competition. And I can
assure you, in giving you, as your new Minister for Northern
Australia, a man of this capacity, this drive, this capacity
to comprehend and convey the big things, the big opportunities,
to approach, and we trust, solve the big problems of this
immense area of our continent, we've made a very good decision
indeed. And I thank you for the reception you gave him;
he deserves it; he'll need a lot of support, and I know the
Labor people of this Territory, and indeed all, the people
who are here in this Territory to develop it, to produce
a good community in this Territory, will give him their support.
Now ladie~ s and gentlemen I spoke earlier in the
park'and so I needn't go over all the things I said then.
There is one particular thing that is rousing people from one
end of Australia to another. And this is the fact that for
the first time in the seventy-five years that we've had a
nation, and a national Parliament, the Senate has taken it on
itself, to block the Budget. It's true that in April last year
they moved a motion to defer the Supply Bills and in those
circumstances, I advised the Governor-General to dissolve both
Houses, to have a double dissolution of the Parliament.
There were a great number of things which needed to be solved,
and one of the thin~ gs which needed to be solved were some of
the-Electoral -Bills, including the bills which were to give you
representation in the Senate this you remember was in the
policy speech in 1972, it was in the policy speech in 1969 as
well. And in Opposition we had brought in bills to give
the representation and vote to people in the Senate from the
Territories. This has been a very long-standing platform of
the Labor Party and I've put it on the Labor Party's behalf
at many elections, and our opponents never objected, never.
Sure, they stalled it when we brought the bills in in Opposition;
but never during a campaign did they ever say, least of all
of course, in the Northern Territory where there was a member
for the House of Representatives, that they objected to you
having members in the Senate. They never said it.
Well, there were six bills in April last year which they had
twice rejected in the Senate, and this was one of them
Medibank was another, other electoral ones were also involved.
So we thought, right, we'll settle it, we'll have, dissolve
both Houses, we'll start off with a clean Parliament. And
at that timie, -they said, we said, that we were seeking to have
the opportunity of governing Australia for three years. They
lost; they made a grievous mistake; we won; we got a comfortable
majority in the House of Representatives; we got as many 
Senators as they got in the whole Parliament we obviously
had the majority. That is, the majority of the members of
Parliament; but of course, in the community as a whole, we
had a very large majority of the votes. In the House of
Representatives I think we got half a million more votes than
all our competitors in the Parliament combined, that is~ the
representatives of the Parties in the Parliament. And in the
House of Representatives we got 165,000 more votes for the
Labor candidates, in the Senate, than were cast for the
candidates of all the other Parties that are represented in
the Senate So by every basis, every test every criteria,
we -ought to have been able to govern uninterrupted for
three years.. But our opponents who courted that election, who
lost that election, haven't seen fit to abide by the verdict.
of the people. And they're up to the same game again.
Once again they've passed the motion to put off a vote on
R~ loney Bills, on the Budget itself. And three times now
they have carried a motion to defer debate on three of the
Budget Eills the Loan Bills and the two Appropriation Billsthree
times they've done this for each of the three bills.
And this time I'm not going to buckle under because if I did,
not only would I, not only would this Government, but any
future Prime Minister, any Government that the people elect,
would have the same threat hanging over them. And the
threat would be made twice a year, because every October
you have to pass the Budget. Bills to pay for the business
of Government for the whole of the financial year from
the first of July previous, to the thirtieth of June following.
And every April you pass the Supply Bills to make provisional
appropriation for the next financial year, from the first
of July to the thirtieth of November, until the Budget in
turn is passed for the whole of that financial year. Twice
a year money Bills come up and if the Senate rejects those
bills and is thereby able to produce an election for the
House of Representatives.. no Government can carry out any
programs it would have to govern for a faw months ahead
alone. And the wicked part of it is that the Senate could,
usually, avoid going to the people itself. Because most of
the people in the Senate are safe as long as their IpArties
endorse them they're safe from the wrath of the electoratebecause
the number 1 and 2 on the Liberal and Country Party
tickets, the number 1 and 2 on the Labor Party ticket
in each of the six States is certain to get back it's only
the fifth person that there's any battle over whether it's
to be Labor or whether it's to be Liberal and Country Party.
There's onlyone-fifth of the Senators who are in any jeopardy
when there's an election for the Senate. But on most of these
occasions there wouldn't be an election for the Senate at all.
You can only have an election for the Senate in two circumstances:
one is when half the Senate is about to come to an end at the
end of the following June you can have an election for that
half of the Senate at any time during the previous twelve monthsthat
is, half the Senators well there've been a couple who've
left the Senate and so 28 of the Senators who are there now,
will be replaced or confirmed some time in this financial year,
and they'll take their places or people will take their~ places
on the. 1July next. 
3.
But at the present moment there are very
special circumstances. When there is an election for the
Senate or for the House of Representatives then for the
first time there will also be two Senators elected from
each of the mainland Territories and there will also be
a choice by the people to, for enators to replace the two
former Labor Senators whom the New South Wales and
Queensland Premiers had replaced with anti-Labor or
non-Labor people that is the successors for Murphy and
Milliner would take office f rom the day the result of the
election for the Senate was declared. So as soon as there's
half a Senate election, which can take place any time
in this financial year.. and the election is usually held
in November or December,. then on this occasion the new
Senators will take office, not from the 1 July only, but
there will be six who will take office from the time the
election result is declared. So that's one circumstance
in which you can have an election for the Senate.
And the other circumstance in which you can have
an election for the Senate is where there is a Bill, or more
than one Bill which has been twice rejected by the Senate.
Now that is the situation now as it was the situation, of course,
in the first half of last year when we had the double dissolution.
But if there is not half a Senate coming up, or if there has
not been a double rejection of any Bill by the Senate, then
there can't be an election for the Senate. And in those
circumstances-and these were the circumstances for the first
seven monqths that we were in Government, and they again were
the circumstances for the first seven months after we were
re-elected in May last year,.. then they can cut off the Budget,
they can cut off Supply and, they believe, can then bring
about an election for the House of Representatives without
having to face the people themselves. Now this is an end
to stable government in this country.
I've been astonished and gratified by the number of
migrantswno come to our meetings. And one of the r'easons, IVmconvinced,
why they come to our meetings on this issue, is
that they have so often come from countries where democracy
ha3 been destroyed or where.' it is very fragile or where it
is under challenge. And they thought that Australia, an
independent pioneering country,. but nevertheless a country
which was the heir to British parliamentary traditions, at
least was a country where people could change the Government
at the ballot box, where there could be a peaceful transfer
of power if the people saw fit, from a Government to an
Opposition. And then if the opposition became the Government
it had a fair go, it had three years in which to justify
itself. And then if it couldn't, it would then go back
into Opposition and the previous Government would come back.
At least they thought that in our democracy it was possible to
change governments peacefully and by your private decision
at the ballot box and then the government you chose could
govern.-I am determined to see that governments which are
elected by the Australian people are allowed to govern. I will not 
have an election for the House of Representatives or the
Senate or both until the Budget is passed. And that's
to be quite clear.
I've never had any doubt as to the result of
an election between the Liberal-Country Parties on one
hand and Labor on the other. When it camne to an election,
when people had a choice, where they saw the alternatives,
where they saw us for better or for worse, and where
they had to size up our opponents for better or for-worse,
they once again would choose us. I believe the remarkable
thing of the last three weeks has been the perception by the
public of the type of man Mr Fraser is. They've seen him
to be impatient and greedy, because he's not the sort of
person that knows what the Australian people want in the
cities or the outback Sure, he represents what's
called a country electorate. But if you go to that country
electorate which he represents ) you will see that it is
a long-settled, very serene sort of place. -That is, it's
not bursting with vitality' it is not a pioneering outback
electorate; it hasn't got the new resources which
Australians want to develop for themselves; it's an
old-fashioned electorate.-good people undoubtedly, but
not the sort of people that have to face the problems which
now have to be faced in the cities and in the outback.
He's not in touch with the Australian people and the people
to whom he turns for advice are newspaper proprietors
including the exp;. triate -proprietor who owns your papers
in the'Territory I don't know how Rupert Murdoch II
remains on the electoral rolls or remainis as the owner of
television or radio stations because you're supposed to be
Australian residents if your to be on the rolls or if your ' re
to own the electronic media and he's not an Australian
resident. Nevertheless. the other-people that back him are the
Country Party, and the Country Party are the most selfish
people in Australia no question about it. And it was the
Country Party, as well as the Liberals, who didn't want you
to have votes in the Northern Territory. They thought you
would upset their apple-cart and if you go for your
advice, if you seek the views'of newspaper proprietors and
Country Party leaders you'll go wrong, and that's what Mr
Snedden did, and he went wrong, and he went bad, and this is
what Mr Fraser has done as well. I've always thought he'd
betray himself this way he's done the wrong thing, and he's
been found out and the people have noticed it. Now I've
always been certain that if we have an election campaign and
they have to give up just relying on our sins and try to
project some virtues of their own, they'd flop, and they willwhenever
I call the election. But the big thing is that I've
got to ensure that whatever the Government is . the people choose,
is able to govern. -It was a great shock to the conservative
system when we were elected in December 1972. Th * ey felt
that we were usurpers we were trespassers, and they are
doing their very best to see that the people' s will, twice
expressed ) is frustrated. They've wanted to keep us off balance,
or to get us off balance they're not going to. Because
we are fighting for a proper principle that if the People 
choose a Government,. that Government must be given a
fair go. What's the alternative. Th extraordinary
thing I hear them expressing now is that if a Government
can't get things through the Senate then the Senate ought
to choose a Government. But they haven't got a majority
in the Senate either they have 30 meinbers,* half the
Senate and if you're to get something through the Senate,
you've got to get a majority. If a vote is even in the
Senate, then the motion or the Bill is not passed.
Now they'Ive not had a vote on the Budget and it's plain
from what Liberal senators have said on TV that if there
was a vote on the Budget the vote would go in the affirmativethat
is~ the Senate would pass the Budget. But the device
they've used, three times, on each of three Bills, is to
put up a motion that the debate should be deferred. That is,
as I put it at the meeting this morning, they've gone on
strike they won't do the job. And of course, even then
they wouldn't have carried it if Bjelke-Petersen hadn't
put in an anti-Labor person to succeed t1illiner.
If Milliner had been there, then the vote would have been
even and the vote to adjourn or to defer would have been
defeated. Now that is the technicality, the illegitimate
technicality) upon which they have gone on strike.
Now I put to you this morning a couple of things
which I believe are very great arguments to u ' se
in the' Territory. One is the way they've cut things off
for the Territory. Because here, and in Canberra, you
depend on the Federal Budget alone. There is no part of
Australia, with the possible exception of Canberra, where
so many people depend on national Government payments
they'e on he' payroll or they're doing contracts ' or the
Government. If federal money wasn't spent in the Northern
Territory most people in the Territory wouldn't have a job,
or they wouldn't be able to get contracts, or
make supplies. This Territory depends on the federal
Government more than any other part of Australia. It depends
on the federal Budget more than any State depends on the
federal Budget, and the State Government Budgets and the
Local Government Budgets combined. Private enterprise is
certainly valuable in the Territory as it is everywhere in
a mixed economy like Australia but private enterprise,
for historical and understandable reasons, bulks smaller
in the Northern Territory than anywhere else in Australia.
For better or for worse you depend on the Government in the
Northern Territory more than any other part of Australia
depends on Governments. You don't have State Governments
you depend, you only have a couple of local councils
you depend more on the national Government than any other
Australians depend on all Government activities
employment, orders, contracts,. combined. And this is what
they've done to you in the Budget. In the Budget, which
they've stalled, there's $ 439 million for the Northern
Territory there's $ 58 m for housing and construction;
there's $ 45 m for education; there's $ 113 mn to run the
Department of Northern Australia; there is $ 40 m for
health services and there is $ 32 m for Aboriginal welfare and 
advancement. And in total $ 439 m held up. Now I believe
the people in this Territory will be outraged when they
see what is happening at the hands of the Liberal and
Country Party. And then I come to the other argument which I
believe is.. overwhelming, overpowering in this Territory.
The next _ election there is in this Territoryl or anywhere
in Australia, the next time there's an election for the
House of Representatives in Australia, the next time there
is an election for the Senate in any State in Australia, there
will also be an election for two Senators from the Northern
Territory and I believe in these circumstances you ought to
be able to get two-thirds of the votes, you ought to be
able to get in both Ted Robertson and Kevin Frazer
Frazer spelt with a I noticed from most of the signs
around Australia, the other Fraser is spelt with a
swastika! And you know they've got the gall now to
contest the Senate situation in the Northern Territory.
They've tried their level best, by every medns, to prevent
the Northern Territory and Canberra having the right to
elect Senators,. it's astonishing in this day and age
that a Parliament which makes laws for any community shou" Ld
not give, that community the right to choose members in the
law-making body. I mean this wouldn't occur, we would think,
anywhere else in the world, but you have to obey the laws
passed by the federal Parliament and the laws can only be
made if they-go through the House of Representatives and
the Senate as well. And they've said every Liberal
and every Country Party man,.-except one, on one occasion
has said that you shouldn't have senators in from the Northern
Territory, you shouldn't have a voice, still less a vote,
on anything in the Senate, even if it concerns the Northern
Territory alone, as some legislation does. You can not choose
your law-makers that's their proposition. And three
times we had to put this bill up in the Senate: on the
first time it came before the House of Representatives the
Liberals voted against it, -they've been consistent;
the Country Party on the first time voted in favour of it.
When it went to the Senate, they all there voted against it.
And it was defeated. So with an interval of three months,
which is required, we brought it up again; it passed through
the House of Representatives; in the Senate once again,
every Liberal and Country Party member voted against it.
And then that was all we could do in that Parliament, but it
was one of the bills for the double dissolution. After the
double dissolution we again put it up in the Senate it
was passed by the Reps" we put it up in the Senate, and
again, every Country Party and Liberal senator voted against
it, although it had been, once again, onre of thepp ledges--
the Government made. The first time they'd been a double
dissolution and the Senate had not passed the bill had
produced the double dissolution. So for the first time in
history we have to have a Joint Sitting and we had the
numbers in the Joint Sitting and every Country Party and
Liberal member voted against the Territory getting
representation in the Senate except Sam Calder; he cuts no
ice among his own crowd, because they all voted against hiim 
Hie did vote for it himself, but he was terribly embarrassed
because for the first time he made a scene in the Househe
wanted to be thrown out so he wouldn't have to votebut
we weren't going to accommodate him that way; he
had to stay. So he voted for it; the best vote he's
ever cast in his years in the Parliament. And a]. l his
mates deserted him.
Th ese Country Party candidates-don't forget that every
Country Party man in the Senate, there' s no women in the.
Country Party, has voted against having representation
in the ( interjector whistles) they wouldn't be worth
whistling for if they were! Everybody, John Gorton,
Billy McMahon, Billy Snedden, Malcolm Fraser you seem
to have forgotten the others they were no betterand
Anthony and Sinclair and Nixon, and all of themthey
all voted against it. So when in the Senate
campaign any Lib EaJ. or Country Party person comes up here
* say Why did you vote against us having a vote for the
Senate?. Why because they all did. But then of course,
when it was finally through, that wasn't enough, a
* Country Party Premier, Bjelke-Petersen, he then asked
the High Court to say that it was unconstitutional, that
is*, something that the people had endorsed, one would
have thought at the ' 72 elections and again at the ' 74 elections,
something that had been passed by the House of Representatives
three times, and at a Joint Sitting, this was then said to be
unconstitutional. And he was supported by the Liberal Premier
of Western Australia. Well the High Court determined,
three weeks ago yesterday, that it was constitutional.
I notice somebody in the audience this morning blamed Murphy
for this-I meanMurphy did the
sensible, decent thing. I mean ~ some people seem to think
that there's something wrong in having a Labor Attorney-General
on the High Court, but it's O. K. to have a Liberal one.
And there's no need for me to tell you how Barwick voted on
this, and how he voted, and how Murphy voted on this.
on the Court. And Senator Greenwood made a great to-do
about this three weeks ago: how montrous that Murphy should
have given judgment on a piece of legislation on whose
constitutionality he had advised. Now the fact is that back
in 1961, when Barwick was Attorney-General, he advised the
Government that there shouldn't be a vote for people in the
House of Representatives from the Territories except on
matters which concerned the Territories alone. So one would
have thought that Barwick's views on representation and
voting for the Territories in the House of Representatives and
the Senate were well known, just as well known as Murphy's,
and they've been consistent, both of them; they've been
consistent. I don~' t blame Barwick for being consistent, but
I think it's a bit of a cheek to blame Murphy for being
consistent. On this matter they were ' paired'. But
not only this Bjelke-Petersen heaped insult on injury by
saying that the member of the House of Representatives from the
Northern Territory shouldn't be able to vote either
now we know he never speaks, but Bjelke-Petersen said he
shouldn' t vote either that you not only shouldn' t have people
in the Senate, with * seats or votes, the chap you had in the
House of Representatives could have a seat, couldn't speak
that makes no difference but couldn't vote either. 
So I think it's pretty clear, up in this
Territory, you know what the striking Senators from. the
States, the Liberal and Country Party Senators from
the States, who've gone on strike, what they think of the
Territories. Canberra and the Northern Territory ought
to be outraged on this because they suffer more than any
other part of Australia. It's the Liberal and Country
Parties who are provoking unemployment in this country.
Just when we seem to be turhing the corner, in these
respects, . inflation and unemployment,.-they are now
wanting to exacerbate the position, to bring about a
deterioration. They're the wreckers. This Budget of
Bill Hayden's is the best the country has had for yearseverybody
in the Territory will benefit from it.
And they don't want to give it a chance to work. They
say that in certain circumstances they'd pass the Budget
Mr Fraser made a speech on the Budget himself made
quite a number of criticisms in fact and then they
were shown to be very shallow or in fact falacious.
And he now says that his Budget is ' inoperative' the
old Nixon word you remember Nixon's Press'Secretary,'
Zi * eglerj said that one of the answers, not altogether
accurate answers, that the President gave was ' inoperative'.
Well Mr Fraser's speech on the Budget, in his own words,
is now ' inoperative'. He doesn't want ours to operate either.
lie's got no alternative; purely negative.
Ladies and gentlemn, . I'm certain that when,
sometime before the end of next June, there is for the
first time an opportunity for the -people of this. Territory
to choose representatives in the Senate ~ that they will choose
people who will not brook any further damage to this Territory;
who will insist in the Territory having its, full rights
in the national Parliament, and they will turn to the Party
which has fought ok those things, through all the
obstruction, through all the opposition by States and Courts
and Senate that they will see that the Senate is only
properly represented from this Territory by two Labor
candidates Robertson and Frazer with a 



PRIME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, ALICE SPRINGS
1 NOVEMBER 1975
Ladies and Gentlemen: I've had along standing engagement this week
down in Port Augusta, but I thought that in the present circumstances,
the time when the Senate is on strike, when it's holding the whole
of the country to ransom, when there is going to be an election in
the next few months for the Senate, and because despite all Country
Party obstruction the people of the Territory will at last get a vote
for Senators in the National Parliament,. it is the people in the
Northern Territory and in Canberra who will break to strike by the
Senate. And I'll give you some of the consequences of this strike.
Because the two Territories, the Northern Territory and the Capital
Territory, depend more than any other parts of Australia on what is
in the National Budget. And for the first time in the country's
history the Budget is being stalled. It's not been rejected; it's
been stalled. The Senate hasn't gone on record against the Budget;
as a matter of fact, they see nothing wrong with the Budget. They
say if there is an election they'll pass the Budget the Budget must
* be beaut. But they've tried,. But they've gone on strike. They won'tt
vote on the Budget. And they've stalled it on one particular dirty
Country Party trick. Three months ago, a Labor Senator died in
Queensland. And a Country Party Premier appointed an anti-Labor man
to succeed the deceased Labor Senator.
Now don't blame the Liberal Ministers in Queensland because they
voted to do the right thing. Every Liberal Minister in the Queensland
Parliament voted in favour of a Labor replacement for the deceased
Labor $ enator. But it was the Country Party Ministers, the Country
Party Premier, the Country Party and Liberal rank and file who
perpetrated this dirty trick. They chose an anti-Labor Senator to
succeed a Labor Senator and accordingly when a motion was moved in
the Senate to put off voting on the Budget, to defer the Budget, to
stall the Budget, to go on strike, the motion was carried only because
a Labor Senator had died. If the Labor Senator had still been there,
if, a he had throughout his life., voted in favour of Labor principles
then the attempt ' by the Count ry' Party to defeat, to defer, to stall*
the Buidget would have been frustrated. As Senator Steele Hall said,
a former Liberal Premier of South Australia,* the motion to go on
strike in the Senate was carried over a dead man's corpse. ' If a
Country Party Premier had done the right thing and had appointed a
Labor replacement for a deceased Labor Senator, then the plot to go
on strike would not have been carried in the Senate. The Senate
would have had to vote for the Budget. And if there is a vote on
the Budget itself, then it will be passed in the Senate. Because
on T. V. last weekend a Liberal Senator, from Tasmania T. you might
never have heard of him, his name is Bessel) Senator Bessell said
that he would never vote against the Budget and he also said that
there were a number of other Liberal Senators of the'same mind. That
means that the Budget would be passed if it ever came to a vote. But
it's not being passed for the sole reason, that the Senate has gone
on strike.
Now let me show you the results of this strike by the Senate.
Because in the Budget there is a total for the Northern Territory
of '$ 439 million, $ 439 m'illion will come to the Northern
Territory as soon as the Budge---is passed. And this $ 439 million
is being held up, it's being denied to the Northern Territory 
because the Liberal and Country Party Senators have gone on strike.
* Now up in the top, in Darwin, there is $ l02* million waiting
to reconstruct Darwin. It's being held up by the Senate strike;
-$ 102. rmillion. And then for housing and construction throughout
the Territory, on top of that, housing and construction which in the
Territory depend principally on Federal Government funds, there is
$ 58 million being held up by the Senate strike. Once the
Senate passes the Budget then this year there will be .$ 58 million
available for housing and construction in the Northern Territory
It's being held up by the Senate strike. And then for schools
and colleges in the Territory, there is a sum of $ 45 mnillion.
being held up by the Senate. The Senate strike is denying the
Territory $ 45 million for education. Then for health services,
hospitals, health centres) there is * the sum of $ 40 ' Million being
held up by the Senate strike. Once the Senate calls off its strike
there will be 40 million dollars available for hospitals and health
services in the Territory. And then for* all the rest of
the-functions which the Department of Northern Australia provides
in the-Territory there is a sum of $ 113 million being held
up by the Senate strike. And then for Aboriginal welfare and
advancement there is a sum of '$ 32 million. being held up by
the Senate strike.
Now Ladies and Gentlemen, the strike may finally be broken by having
elections for Senators in the Northern Territory and the Capital
Territory. And I will give to you the long-protracted fight we've had
to have in the Federal Parliament over the last three years to get
the right. for people in the Territories to elect people to the
Senate and to have votes for the people in the Senate. The Country
Party and the Liberal Parties have put up the longest battle against
this reform that they've put up on any issue whatever.
Now first, you'll remember that back in my 1972 Policy Speech I
promised that if we became the Government there would be Senators
for the two Territori'es with full voting rights. Two Senators for
the Northern Territory. Two Senators for the Australian Capital
Territory. And I'm on the platform here with Labor's candidate
as Senators for the Northern Territory, Ted Robertson and
Kevin Frazer. Now this is one of the good Fra * zer' s. I don't think
the other Fraser has ever been to the Northern Territory. Well
I don't think Billy Snedden -you remember Billy Snedden, he was once
Leader of the Liberals And I don't think he came here. And I don't
remember Billy McMahon coming here. And I don't remember John Gorton
' coming here, or Harold Holt, or Bob Menzies, that is, Liberal
Prime MinistersrLiberal Leaders never came to the Northern Territory.
I don't think Menzies or Holt, or Gorton, or McMahon, or Snedden or
Fraser. I'm sick of the constant change.
. I'm ih the process of doing over the fifth successive
Liberal Leader. And I don't think any of them ever bothered to hold
a meeting in Alice Springs. We did last last election in May,. ' 74,
* but-. they never came here. Because they didn't have elections for
the Senate. They didn't have to worry about you. But we promised
at the last electionsthat we would see that the Northern Territory
got representatives'in the Senate. Because you have to obey laws
which are passed by the Federal Parliament, both the House of
Representatives and the Senate. But according to the Liberals and
the Country Party you weren't entitled to have-anybody in the Senate
which had to make those laws. And because you will now have members in
the Senate you will be able to break the log jam that the Senate
has presented over the last three years. Because in the last three 
years, the last three years, the Senate has rejected more Bills
than it had in the previous" 72 years. In all the years between 1901
and 1972 the Senate had rejected, all told, less than 70 Bills.
In the last three years the Senate has rejected over * 90 Bills.
So they've been more obstructive than any Senate in history.
Three years: they've done more to throw out than they had in the
previous 72. But this is what they've done about the Territory.
Is there anybody in this audience who doesn't think the Territory
should have representatives in the Senate? -Will you please raise
your hand if you think that the Northern Territory shouldn't have
a Senator? There's 2 people; there were 3 hands and 2 people. Is
this the best you can do?-Aren't there any people who'll support
the Liberals and the Country Party in denying the Territory
* representation in the Senate? I just want to go back, that is, I
want to tell the House of Representatives next week that in this,
the largest political meeting ever held in the Northern Territory, 4
there were only 2 people that were prepared to say that the Northern
Territory shouldn't have members in the Senate. Because this is the
history, this is the history of ourattempts to get representation in.
the Senate for the Northern Territory-We brought in the Bill on
the 30 May 19731 two and a half years ago in the House of RepresentativeE'
we passed the Bill to give the Northern Territory two Senators. That
is~ two and a half years ago. The Liberals voted against it. Gorton.,
McMahon, Snedden, Fraser, they all voted against you having
representatives in the Senate. The Country Party voted with us in
favour of the Northern Territory having Senators. It's the only time
the Country Party has ever voted for you to have representatives in
the Senate and when it went to the Senate every member of the Liberal
Party, every member of the Country Party and the DLP you
remember the DLPI'? they voted against you having representatives.
So that was the first time.
On the 7 June 1973 the Opposition in the Senate denied you having
representatives in the Senate. Then three months later we brought
the Bill in again and on the. 27 September 1973 it went through t'-he
House of Representatives; for the second time the House of Representatives
said you should have Senators from the Northern Territory.
It went up to the Senate and on the 14 November 1973 all the Liberal
and Country Party Senators, all of them, voted to defeat the Bill.
That meant the next election, the election in May last year for the
House of Representatives and the Senate, you couldn't get Senators
because the Liberal and the Country Party voted against you getting
them. And you remember in May 1974 in this town I repeated that if
we were returned once again we would try to get you Senators for the
Northern Territory. And we won the election. We won the second time.
And then we brought the Bill up again and in the House of
it was passed for the third time. And for the third time the Senate
rejected it; every Liberal, every Country Party Senator, on three
occasions has voted against the Northern Territory having Senators.
So then we had a Joint Sitting and at the joint sitting all the
Liberals and all the Country Party, with one exception your Country
Party member never speaks; silent Sam never has a word to say,
but for once in his life he did the right thing; he voted for you
to have representatives in the Senate. And such influence does he
have on his Country Party colleagues that they all. left him alone
and voted with the Liberals against you having Senators for the
Northern Territory. 
if the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory
had had Senators, then the Senate would not have goneon Strike.
Because this is what the strike is costing the Northern Territory:
$ 439 million is being held up for the Northern Territory; $ 439
million is being held up for the Northern Territory by the Senate
strike. And $ 58 million is being held up because the Senators from
the* States have gone on strike and $ 45 million is being held
up because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from the States
have gone on strike. And aboriginal welfare and advancement in.
the Northern Territory is being denied $ 32 million; the Liberal
and Country Party Senators have gone on strike. And hospitals and
health services in the Northern Territory are being denied $ 40 million
because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from the States have
gone on strike. And schools and colleges, Government and Church
schools and colleges, in the Northern Territory are being denied
million because the Liberal and Country Party Senators from
the States have gone on strike. All help and all the affairs
of the Department of Northern Australia are being held up because
$ 113 million for administrative services to pay employees, to pay
contractors, to pay suppliers~ is being held up $ 113 million being
held up for the Department of Northern Australia because the Liberal
and Country Party Senators from the States have gone on strike.
All told therem$ 439 million waiting to come
tothe Northern Territory between now and the end of next June
because the State Senators, the Liberal and Country Party Senators
from the States have gone on strike.
Ladies and Gentlemen) I know perfectly well the attitude of the people
of this Territory. Never again will you allow the Senate to go on
strike. Never again, never again will the Senate be able to hold
the Teriitories up to ransom. Because the Territories more than
any other parts of Australia depend on the National Budget for their
welf are, their prosperity and their progress. If the Liberals
and the Country Party had not prevented the Northern Territory having
Senators since May last year, if you'd had Senators from the Northern
Territorythe Senate wouild not have gone on strike. The Northern
Territory would be getting the $ 439 million to which it is entitled
without interruption.
Ladies and Gentlemen , when the election comes don't forget to make
Ted Robertson and Kevin Frazer the first Senators from the Northern
Territory. Never again allow the Senate to hold up the welfare,
prosperity, and progress of the Northern Territory. Never again
allow State Senators to go on strike. 



. I. ME MINISTER'S SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, PORT AUGUSTA
2 NOVEMBER 1975
Mr Wallis, ladies and gentlemen. I was asked about
six months ago to come to Port Augusta today because it's
the Diamond Jubilee at the Diocese of Willochra. And this
was a somewhat unexpected invitation, so novel in fact, that
I penned it in six months ago in my diary. And in the*
meantime-some other events have occurred, so I thought that
yesterday I would travel to Port Augusta via Alice Springs
and Whyalla. And I'm happy to have an audience of Labor
supporters in this electorate of Grey just before I go in
about twenty minutes time to the other celebration.
The last time I was here was in April and I was
passing through on the way to Tarcoola to inaugurate the
biggest railway project in Australia since the transcontinental
was started in Port Augusta at the outbreak of the First World
War. The biggest railway project in Australia for over
* sixty years. And shortly after that, you'll remember, that
we tried to put through the South Australian Parliament the
agreement to hand over the financial and management responsibility
to South Australia's non-metropolitan railways to the Australian
Government. And the Legislative Council of South Australia
* blocked it. And you had an election in South Australia.
And there were two big issues in that election. One was the
excellence of this financial deal that the Dunstan Government
had made with my Government to hand over the non-metropolitan
railways to the Australian Government which would mean an
immense financial advantage to the State Government; and
also an immense improvement in railway services, in South
Australia and through South-Australia, frorai all the other States
and up to the NorthernTerritory. That was the first issue.
And the other issue was the obstruction by an Upper House against
the policies of an elected government. And that's the thing
which is happening in the Australian Parliament now.
And I'm satisfied that we are going to win this issue
in the Australian Parliament throughout Australia, the same way
as Don Dunstan won on this issue last July in South Australia.
The simple fact is that governments, whether they're
the Federal Government or the* State Governments are made or
unmade in the Lower House. If a Party or Parties have a
majority in the Lower House, the House of Representatives or the
House of Assembly, then that's the Government. You can't be
the Government of Australia or South Australia or of any of the
States, unless you have a majority in the Lower House. And
* twice now, in December 1972 and in May last year, the Australian
Labor Party secured a comfortable majority in the House of
Representatives. And on each occasion, in December 1972 and
again in May 1974, the election was about who was-* to be the
Government of Australia for the next three years. Before half
that time-was up, in April last year, the Senate threatened to
block Supply, to say: " Well, look we won't give the Government
the authority to spend the taxes which are being collected.
We'll bring the business of Government to a standstill." / 2 
-2-
Now, at that time I said., " Right, we'll have a double dissolution;
there are six Bills which the Senate has held up, which it's
rejected twice, and we can settle the issue of Medibank, we
can settle the issue of equal electorates, electorates of the
same number of electors, we can do that now." And we had a
double dissolution, and we won. We got an overall majority,
a comfortable majority, in the whole * Parliament. And when on
a third occasion the Senate voted against the Medibank Bills
and a third time the Senate voted against the Electoral Bill;
and the third time the Senate voted against the Petroleum and
Minerals Authority Bill, which was designed to give-Australians
the opportunity to develop their own natural resources; when
a third time all those things happened, we had a Joint Sitting.
And at that Joint Sitting we comfortably passed all those
Bills. And never since has the Government been beaten in
any division, and there's scores of divisions which have taken
place in the House of Representatives.
We are clearly entitled to see out our three year
term. We were elected as the Government, and in the House
of Representatives where governments are made or unmade, we
still have a comfortable majority. And the proposition which
is being put by the Liberals and the Country Party is, that
because we haven't got a majority in the Senate, they can
blackmail us, hold us up, hijack us, whenever they wish. But
they haven't got a majority in the Senate either.
Now Governments are never made in the Senate; they
never have been; you can't have a Prime Minister in the Senate;
you can't have a Treasurer in the Senate and the Constitution
says that the Senate can't initiate Money Bills; the Senate
can't amend Money Bills and all. that the Senate can do is to
make a request to the House of Representati. ves to amend the
Money Bills. And the House of Representati~ ves may, if it sees
fit, accept the request or it can reject the request. That's
the sum total of the Senate's powers as laid out in the
Constitution. Let's go back to what happened in May last year, when
there was an election for both Houses. The Labor candidates
for the Senate got 165,000 votes more than the candidates of
all the other Parties represented in the Senate. But because
it's a complicated electoral system and so on, we ended up with
29 out of 60 Senators; and the Liberals and the Country Party
ended up with 29 out of 60 Senators; we got more votes but
they got as many members; but they didn't-get a majority, we
didn't get a majority. And in the Senate if the votes are
equal on any issue then the vote is lost. If there is a motion
for a Bill comes before the Senate and there are as many
people voting against it as for it, then it's lost. It's rejected.
Now after the election an Independent from Tasmania
joined the Liberal Party. And on our side, Senator Murphy
was appointed to the High Court fair enough that there should
be a Labor Attorney-General on the High Court, for the last ten
years there has been a Liberal Attorney-General, Barwick
himself,' it's fair enough that there should be an Attorney-
General from each side on the High Court. And then later
Senator Milliner died, the Labor Senator from Queensland. 
-3-
And the New South Wales Government -a Liberal Premier and
the Queensland Government a Country Party Premier appointed
replacements for Murphy and Milliner, who opposed the Labor
Party. The one from Queensland is the worse case Field,
Pat the Rat but still, still the Liberals and the Country
Party haven't got a majority in the Senate.. They have 30, one
of the Independents joined them, they've got 30. That is, even
if they thought they were entitled to-be the government, they
couldn't get the things through the Senate without the support
of the people who don't belong to their Party. And they have
no chance of getting a majority for any proposition they put
up in the House of Representatives.
So you have this situation, that at the moment the
Senate is not the Senate that the people elected in May last
year. There are two Senators who were appointed by anti-
Labor State Governments until there is an election for the
Senate and they belong, they are opponents of the Labor Party.
It's a stacked Senate. It is a tainted Senate. And on the
* basis of this Senate different to what it wa's when there was
last an election in May last year; and different because a
Liberal Premier and a Country rParty Premier. have done the wrong
thing; on this Budget the Liberals and the Country Party
relying on a stacked pack of cards, a tainted Senate, take
* it on themselves to say: we won't allow the Australian
Government to have the authority to spend the taxes which
everybody still has to pay.
Now it has never happened before in Australia's
history. There have been many occasions, particularly since
there was proportional elections for the Senate introduced
in 1949, when the Government hasn't had a majority in the
Senate. There were many occasions when Holt, and Menzies before
him and Gorton after him, didn't have a majority in the Senate.
But nevertheless t-he Senate always passed the Government's
Money Bills. The Senate can't initiate them; it can't
amend them; it can only make a request to amend them and the
House-of Representatives can accept or reject that request.
But never on all the occasions when a Government has not had
a majority in the Senate, has the Senate ever presumed to
reject the Budget. On 139 occasions Money Bills have been
put by the Government to the Senate when the Senate didn't
have a majority of Government Senators. And on every occasion
the Senate has passed those Bills.
Now I want to point out that on this occasion, the
Sienate hasn't yet rejected the Bill; it hasn't voted on it.
What has been passed is a motion to defer. debate; to stall;
* the Senate has gone on strike. Liberals and Country Party
Senators have gone on strike. And on this motion the voting
was 29 to 28, that is, there was one majority. If Senator
Milliner had still been there he would have been voting with
the 28; it would be 29 all. And in those circumstances the
motion to defer debate on the Budget Bills would have been
rejected. There is not a majority against the Budget in the
Senate. And all that Mr Fraser is doing, is keeping his
Senators sufficiently in line to vote for a deferment. Some
of them have said, Senator Bessel of Tasmania said on Four
Corners last weekend that in a vote on the Budget itselft he .4 
-4-
would not vote against the Budget. And he also said, Senator
Bessell on Four Corners last weekend that there were many other
Senators of the same mind. So once there is a vote on the
Budget Bills in the Senate, the Budget Bills will be passed.
And the motion which has been carried, just because Senator
Milliner is dead; the motion was carried as Senator Steele
Hall said " over a dead man's corpse". They say " If there is
going to be an election, we'll pass the Budget". That is,
there is nothing wrong with the Budget according to the Liberal
and. Country Parties.
True enough, Mr Fraser made a few criticisms of the
Budget after it was introduced, a week after it was introduced.
And his criticisms, of course, were shown to be very damaging
to his cause. And one of the things that the Liberals proposed
was that if they got into Government they would go back to the
old system of income taxation where there was Federal income
tax and State income tax as well. And this is the proposal
which would benefit maybe the people of Victoria and in
New South Wales it would be equal fifty-fifty, it would make
no difference but in the four smaller States everybody would
have to pay higher income tax. That's what used to be the
case in Australia before uniform income tax was introduced by
a Labor Government in 1942. It was the case still in Canada,
if you're in the smaller Canadian provinces you pay ' higher
State income tax, provincial income tax, than you do if you're
in the big one, the prosperous one like Ontario and British
Columbia. All the other provinces pay a higher tax. And this
is what Mr Fraser was proposing in his alternate Budget. He
realised that it was very unpopular in the four smaller States,
including yours. So he now says that his Budget proposals are
inoperative. You remember that great phase of President Nixon's
Press Secreatry came out, President Nixon was caught out in
giving a reply which wasn't accurate in Australia if anybody
does that he's sacked but in the United States they said: The
answer was " inoperative". And Mr Fraser at a press conference
on Wednesday week used the same phase: my Budget proposals
are " inoperative*. So there is nothing wrong with the Budget; it is.
just a hijack operation. They say they want an election now.
Now of course, they didn't say in May last year, at the last
election that if they lost they wouldn't accept the verdict; they
didn't say then that they would use any numbers they got in
the Senate to prevent the Government governing for the full three
years for which it was elected. Arnd, of course, back in that
was Billy Snedden was in charge of it that time it's getting
very uncomfortable for me, you know; I'm in the process of
demolishing the fifth Liberal leader: Holt, Gorton, McMahon,
Snedden, Fraser; they're all lasting less time as time goes on.
Watch for the next fascinating instalment, ladies and gentlemen.
But last April., April last year, when I yielded to
this blackmail we had an election which meant that we were
without a national Parliament for three months. The two Houses
were dissolved on the 10th of April. and we had the earliest
election we could; we had the quickest count we could; and
then we assembled the Parliament as quickly as possible. And
we couldn't bring it together until the 9th of July, one day
short of three months after Parliament had been dissolved. 
I don't believe that at this time in our battle against inflation
and unemployment, we can afford to have the Australian
Parliament suspended for another three months. We must get
on with the Budget; we must get on with the economic recovery;
we must get people back to work, particularly the school
leavers in the next month or two months. And the Liberals
and the Country Party are deliberately holding the country
to ransom; their strike is designed to promote unemployment
and dissatisfaction. Now we must make it plain to the Australian people who
are the guilty men. Because Mr Fraser when he took over from
Mr Snedden and when he realised that Mr Snedden had been
destroyed by taking the advice of the Country Party Leaders
and the newspaper proprietors, he said, very properly, that he
believed strongly that if a government had been elected it was
entitled to govern for its three year term. And he made an
exception; he said: " unless there are reprehensible.
circumstances." And as the pressure has grown on him from
the Country Party Leaders, as the pressure built from the
newspaper proprietors, he forgot his principles, he was
casting round for some reprehensible circumstance. And he's
never been able to find any at all. Every weekend he gets
more and more desperate in his abuse of me. And the Country
Party Leaders too. -But I've had no associations with CIA
money in Australia, as Anthony has. My wife hasn't received
any $ 16,000 necklaces for launching ships overseas, as
Sinclair's wife did. I haven't got, or my family hasn't got,
superph. 6sphate subsidies as Fraser's has. No income tax troubles
in my family. That is, they've been able to get nothing on me.
And they're getting more and more desperate, these men who
are subsidised by the CIA or overseas ship builders, or the
superphosphate people. They're getting more and more desperate
in their personal abuse of me and the whole of the Labor
Government. They've got nothing on us; there are no
reprehensible circ-, unstances at all. The only reprehensible and
extraordinary circumstance is the fact that for the first time
in 75 years a Senate is stalling on the votes on Money Bills.
They haven't voted against them; they know that they wouldn't
all line up at the barrier to reject the Budget. No Federal
Budget has ever been rejected in the 75 years that we've had
a Federal Parliament. And no Upper House in the world nowthe
House of Lords or Canadian Senate or any of these countries
which still have Upper Houses would ever reject a Budget.
It wouldn't happen anywhere else in the world. We've been
made the laughing stock of all our neighbours and in all the
longer settled. democracies around the world by these
shenanigans of the Liberals.
What is at stake is this: are we ever to have in
Australia, the opportunity of changing a government at the
ballot box and being sure that that government will have the
chance to carry out the policies upon which it was elected?
Because if you accept the situation that the Senate, by rejecting
a Money Bill or even just by stalling a Money Bill can produce
an election for the House of Representatives, then you can have
this situation arising twice a year. Because every October
the Budget is brought up to authorise the expenditure of taxes
and loan funds for the whole of the financial year, from the
1st of July past until the 30th of June f~ llowing. / 6 


